--- Page 2 ---
Digital Design Using VHDL
A Systems Approach
This introductory textbook provides students with a system-level
perspective and the tools they need to understand, analyze, and design
digital systems. It goes beyond the design of simple combinational and
sequential modules to show how such modules are used to build complete
systems.
All the essential topics needed to understand modern design practice
are covered, including:
Design and analysis of combinational and sequential modules
Composition of combinational and sequential modules
Data and control partitioning
Factoring and composition of finite-state machines
Interface specification
System timing
Synchronization
Teaches how to write VHDL-2008 HDL in a productive and
maintainable style that enables CAD tools to do much of the tedious
work.
Covers the fundamentals of logic design, describing an efficient
method to design combinational logic and state machines both
manually and using modern CAD tools.

--- Page 3 ---
A complete introduction to digital design is given through clear
explanations, extensive examples, and online VHDL files. The teaching
package is completed with lecture slides, labs, and a solutions manual for
instructors (available via www.cambridge.org/dallyvhdl). Assuming no
previous digital knowledge, this textbook is ideal for undergraduate digital
design courses that will prepare students for modern digital practice.
WILLIAM J. DALLY is the Willard R. and Inez Kerr Bell Professor of
Engineering at Stanford University and Chief Scientist at NVIDIA
Corporation. He and his group have developed system architecture, network
architecture, signaling, routing, and synchronization technology that can be
found in most large parallel computers today. He is a Member of the
National Academy of Engineering, a Fellow of the IEEE, a Fellow of the
ACM, and a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has
received numerous honors, including the ACM Eckert-Mauchly Award, the
IEEE Seymour Cray Award, and the ACM Maurice Wilkes Award.
R. CURTIS HARTING is a Software Engineer at Google and holds a Ph.D. from
Stanford University. He graduated with honors in 2007 from Duke
University with a B.S.E., majoring in Electrical & Computer Engineering
and Computer Science. He received his M.S. in 2009 from Stanford
University.
TOR M. AAMODT is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering at the University of British Columbia.
Alongside his graduate students, he developed the GPGPU-Sim simulator.
Three of his papers related to the architecture of general purpose GPUs
have been selected as “Top Picks” by IEEE Micro Magazine and one as a
“Research Highlight” by Communications of the ACM magazine. He was a
Visiting Associate Professor in the Computer Science Department at
Stanford University during his 2012–2013 sabbatical, and from 2004 to
2006 he worked at NVIDIA on the memory system architecture
(“framebuffer”) of the GeForce 8 Series GPU.
“Dally and Harting blend circuit and architecture design in a clear and
constructive manner on the basis of their exceptional experience in digital
design.”

--- Page 4 ---
“Students will discover a modern and effective way to understand the
fundamental underpinning of digital design, by being exposed to the
different abstraction levels and views of computing systems.”
Giovanni De Micheli, EPFL Switzerland
“Bill and Curt have combined decades of academic and industry experience
to produce a textbook that teaches digital system design from a very
practical perspective without sacrificing the theoretical understanding
needed to train tomorrow’s engineers. Their approach pushes students to
understand not just what they are designing, but also what they are building.
By presenting key advanced topics, such as synthesis, delay and logical
effort, and synchronization, at the introductory level, this book is in the rare
position of providing both practical advice and deep understanding. In
doing so, this book will prepare students well even as technology, tools, and
techniques change in the future.”
David Black-Schaffer, Uppsala University
“Everything you would expect from a book on digital design from Professor
Dally. Decades of practical experience are distilled to provide the tools
necessary to design and compose complete digital systems. A clear and
well-written text that covers the basics and system-level issues equally well.
An ideal starting point for the microprocessor and SoC designers of the
future!”
Robert Mullins, University of Cambridge and the Raspberry Pi
Foundation
“This textbook sets a new standard for how digital system design is taught
to undergraduates. The practical approach and concrete examples provide a
solid foundation for anyone who wants to understand or design modern
complex digital systems.”
Steve Keckler, The University of Texas at Austin
“This book not only teaches how to do digital design, but more importantly
shows how to do good design. It stresses the importance of modularization
with clean interfaces, and the importance of producing digital artifacts that
not only meet their specifications, but which can also be easily understood
by others. It uses an aptly chosen set of examples and the Verilog code used
to implement them.”

--- Page 5 ---
“It includes a section on the design of asynchronous logic, a topic that is
likely to become increasingly important as energy consumption becomes a
primary concern in digital systems.”
“The final appendix on Verilog coding style is particularly useful. This book
will be valuable not only to students, but also to practitioners in the area. I
recommend it highly.”
Chuck Thacker, Microsoft
“A terrific book with a terrific point-of-view of systems. Everything
interesting – and awful – that happens in digital design happens because
engineers must integrate ideas from bits to blocks, from signals to CPUs.
The book does a great job of focusing on the important stuff, moving from
foundations to systems, with the right amount of HDL (Verilog) focus to
make everything practical and relevant.”
Rob A. Rutenbar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 6 ---
Digital Design Using VHDL
A Systems Approach
WILLIAM J. DALLY
Stanford University
R. CURTIS HARTING
Google, Inc.
TOR M. AAMODT
The University of British Columbia
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of education, learning
and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107098862
© Cambridge University Press 2016
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant
collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2016
Printed in the United Kingdom by TJ International Ltd. Padstow Cornwall
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication data
Dally, William J., author.
Digital design using VHDL : a systems approach / William J. Dally, Stanford University, California,
R. Curtis Harting, Google, Inc., New York, Tor M. Aamodt, The University of British Columbia.
pagescm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-107-09886-2 (Hardback : alk. paper)
1. Digital integrated circuits–Computer-aided design. 2. Electronic digital computers–Computer-
aided design. 3. Digital electronics–Data processing. 4. VHDL (Computer hardware description
language) I. Harting, R. Curtis, author. II. Aamodt, Tor M., author. III. Title.
TK7868.D5D3285 2015
621.38150285′5133–dc232015021269
ISBN 978-1-107-09886-2 Hardback
Additional resources for this publication at www.cambridge.org/9781107098862
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for
external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that
any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
CONTENTS
Preface
Acknowledgments
Part IIntroduction
1 The digital abstraction
1.1 Digital signals
1.2 Digital signals tolerate noise
1.3 Digital signals represent complex data
1.3.1 Representing the day of the year
1.3.2 Representing subtractive colors
1.4 Digital logic functions
1.5 VHDL description of digital circuits and systems
1.6 Digital logic in systems
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
2 The practice of digital system design
2.1 The design process
2.1.1 Specification
2.1.2 Concept development and feasibility
2.1.3 Partitioning and detailed design
2.1.4 Verification
2.2 Digital systems are built from chips and boards
2.3 Computer-aided design tools
2.4 Moore’s law and digital system evolution

--- Page 9 ---
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
Part IICombinational logic
3 Boolean algebra
3.1 Axioms
3.2 Properties
3.3 Dual functions
3.4 Normal form
3.5 From equations to gates
3.6 Boolean expressions in VHDL
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
4 CMOS logic circuits
4.1 Switch logic
4.2 Switch model of MOS transistors
4.3 CMOS gate circuits
4.3.1 Basic CMOS gate circuit
4.3.2 Inverters, NANDs, and NORs
4.3.3 Complex gates
4.3.4 Tri-state circuits
4.3.5 Circuits to avoid
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
5 Delay and power of CMOS circuits
5.1 Delay of static CMOS gates
5.2 Fan-out and driving large loads

--- Page 10 ---
5.3 Fan-in and logical effort
5.4 Delay calculation
5.5 Optimizing delay
5.6 Wire delay
5.7 Power dissipation in CMOS circuits
5.7.1 Dynamic power
5.7.2 Static power
5.7.3 Power scaling
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
6 Combinational logic design
6.1 Combinational logic
6.2 Closure
6.3 Truth tables, minterms, and normal form
6.4 Implicants and cubes
6.5 Karnaugh maps
6.6 Covering a function
6.7 From a cover to gates
6.8 Incompletely specified functions
6.9 Product-of-sums implementation
6.10 Hazards
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
7 VHDL descriptions of combinational logic
7.1 The prime number circuit in VHDL
7.1.1 A VHDL design entity
7.1.2 The case statement
7.1.3 The case? statement
7.1.4 The if statement
7.1.5 Concurrent signal assignment statements

--- Page 11 ---
7.1.6 Selected signal assignment statements
7.1.7 Conditional signal assignment statements
7.1.8 Structural description
7.1.9 The decimal prime number function
7.2 A testbench for the prime number circuit
7.3 Example: a seven-segment decoder
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
8 Combinational building blocks
8.1 Multi-bit notation
8.2 Decoders
8.3 Multiplexers
8.4 Encoders
8.5 Arbiters and priority encoders
8.6 Comparators
8.7 Shifters
8.8 Read-only memories
8.9 Read–write memories
8.10 Programmable logic arrays
8.11 Data sheets
8.12 Intellectual property
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
9 Combinational examples
9.1 Multiple-of-3 circuit
9.2 Tomorrow circuit
9.3 Priority arbiter
9.4 Tic-tac-toe
Summary

--- Page 12 ---
Exercises
Part IIIArithmetic circuits
10 Arithmetic circuits
10.1 Binary numbers
10.2 Binary addition
10.3 Negative numbers and subtraction
10.4 Multiplication
10.5 Division
Summary
Exercises
11 Fixed- and floating-point numbers
11.1 Representation error: accuracy, precision, and resolution
11.2 Fixed-point numbers
11.2.1 Representation
11.2.2 Operations
11.3 Floating-point numbers
11.3.1 Representation
11.3.2 Denormalized numbers and gradual underflow
11.3.3 Floating-point multiplication
11.3.4 Floating-point addition/subtraction
Summary
Bibliographic note
Exercises
12 Fast arithmetic circuits
12.1 Carry look-ahead
12.2 Booth recoding
12.3 Wallace trees
12.4 Synthesis notes
Summary

--- Page 13 ---
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
13 Arithmetic examples
13.1 Complex multiplication
13.2 Converting between fixed- and floating-point formats
13.2.1Floating-point format
13.2.2Fixed- to floating-point conversion
13.2.3Floating- to fixed-point conversion
13.3 FIR filter
Summary
Bibliographic note
Exercises
Part IVSynchronous sequential logic
14 Sequential logic
14.1 Sequential circuits
14.2 Synchronous sequential circuits
14.3 Traffic-light controller
14.4 State assignment
14.5 Implementation of finite-state machines
14.6 VHDL implementation of finite-state machines
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
15 Timing constraints
15.1 Propagation and contamination delay
15.2 The D flip-flop
15.3 Setup- and hold-time constraints
15.4 The effect of clock skew
15.5 Timing examples

--- Page 14 ---
15.6 Timing and logic synthesis
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
16 Datapath sequential logic
16.1 Counters
16.1.1A simpler counter
16.1.2Up/down/load counter
16.1.3A timer
16.2 Shift registers
16.2.1A simple shift register
16.2.2Left/right/load (LRL) shift register
16.2.3Universal shifter/counter
16.3 Control and data partitioning
16.3.1Example: vending machine FSM
16.3.2Example: combination lock
Summary
Exercises
17 Factoring finite-state machines
17.1 A light flasher
17.2 Traffic-light controller
Summary
Exercises
18 Microcode
18.1 Simple microcoded FSM
18.2 Instruction sequencing
18.3 Multi-way branches
18.4 Multiple instruction types
18.5 Microcode subroutines
18.6 Simple computer

--- Page 15 ---
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
19 Sequential examples
19.1 Divide-by-3 counter
19.2 SOS detector
19.3 Tic-tac-toe game
19.4 Huffman encoder/decoder
19.4.1Huffman encoder
19.4.2Huffman decoder
Summary
Bibliographic note
Exercises
Part V Practical design
20 Verification and test
20.1 Design verification
20.1.1Verification coverage
20.1.2Types of tests
20.1.3Static timing analysis
20.1.4Formal verification
20.1.5Bug tracking
20.2 Test
20.2.1Fault models
20.2.2Combinational testing
20.2.3Testing redundant logic
20.2.4Scan
20.2.5Built-in self-test (BIST)
20.2.6Characterization
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises

--- Page 16 ---
Part VI System design
21 System-level design
21.1 System design process
21.2 Specification
21.2.1Pong
21.2.2DES cracker
21.2.3Music player
21.3 Partitioning
21.3.1Pong
21.3.2DES cracker
21.3.3Music synthesizer
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
22 Interface and system-level timing
22.1 Interface timing
22.1.1Always valid timing
22.1.2Periodically valid signals
22.1.3Flow control
22.2 Interface partitioning and selection
22.3 Serial and packetized interfaces
22.4 Isochronous timing
22.5 Timing tables
22.5.1Event flow
22.5.2Pipelining and anticipatory timing
22.6 Interface and timing examples
22.6.1Pong
22.6.2DES cracker
22.6.3Music player
Summary
Exercises

--- Page 17 ---
23 Pipelines
23.1 Basic pipelining
23.2 Example pipelines
23.3 Example: pipelining a ripple-carry adder
23.4 Pipeline stalls
23.5 Double buffering
23.6 Load balance
23.7 Variable loads
23.8 Resource sharing
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
24 Interconnect
24.1 Abstract interconnect
24.2 Buses
24.3 Crossbar switches
24.4 Interconnection networks
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
25 Memory systems
25.1 Memory primitives
25.1.1SRAM arrays
25.1.2DRAM chips
25.2 Bit-slicing and banking memory
25.3 Interleaved memory
25.4 Caches
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises

--- Page 18 ---
Part VII Asynchronous logic
26 Asynchronous sequential circuits
26.1 Flow-table analysis
26.2 Flow-table synthesis: the toggle circuit
26.3 Races and state assignment
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
27 Flip-flops
27.1 Inside a latch
27.2 Inside a flip-flop
27.3 CMOS latches and flip-flops
27.4 Flow-table derivation of the latch
27.5 Flow-table synthesis of a D flip-flop
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
28 Metastability and synchronization failure
28.1 Synchronization failure
28.2 Metastability
28.3 Probability of entering and leaving an illegal state
28.4 Demonstration of metastability
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
29 Synchronizer design
29.1 Where are synchronizers used?
29.2 Brute-force synchronizer

--- Page 19 ---
29.3 The problem with multi-bit signals
29.4 FIFO synchronizer
Summary
Bibliographic notes
Exercises
Part VIII Appendix: VHDL coding style and syntax
guide
Appendix A: VHDL coding style
A.1 Basic principles
A.2 All state should be in explicitly declared registers
A.3 Define combinational design entities so that they are easy to
read
A.4 Assign all signals under all conditions
A.5 Keep design entities small
A.6 Large design entities should be structural
A.7 Use descriptive signal names
A.8 Use symbolic names for subfields of signals
A.9 Define constants
A.10 Comments should describe intention and give rationale, not
state the obvious
A.11 Never forget you are defining hardware
A.12 Read and be a critic of VHDL code
Appendix B:VHDL syntax guide
B.1 Comments, identifiers, and keywords
B.2 Types
B.2.1 Std_logic
B.2.2 Boolean
B.2.3 Integer
B.2.4 Std_logic_vector
B.2.5 Subtypes

--- Page 20 ---
B.2.6 Enumeration
B.2.7 Arrays and records
B.2.8 Qualified expressions
B.3 Libraries, packages, and using multiple files
B.4 Design entities
B.5 Slices, concatenation, aggregates, operators, and expressions
B.6 Concurrent statements
B.6.1 Concurrent signal assignment
B.6.2 Component instantiation
B.7 Multiple signal drivers and resolution functions
B.8 Attributes
B.9 Process statements
B.9.1 The process sensitivity list and execution timing
B.9.2 Wait and report statements
B.9.3 If statements
B.9.4 Case and matching case statements
B.9.5 Signal and variable assignment statements
B.10 Synthesizable process statements
B.10.1Type 1: purely combinational
B.10.2Type 2: edge-sensitive
B.10.3Type 3: edge-sensitive with asynchronous reset
References
Index of VHDL design entities
Subject index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 21 ---
PREFACE
This book is intended to teach an undergraduate student to understand and
design digital systems. It teaches the skills needed for current industrial
digital system design using a hardware description language (VHDL) and
modern CAD tools. Particular attention is paid to system-level issues,
including factoring and partitioning digital systems, interface design, and
interface timing. Topics needed for a deep understanding of digital circuits,
such as timing analysis, metastability, and synchronization, are also
covered. Of course, we cover the manual design of combinational and
sequential logic circuits. However, we do not dwell on these topics because
there is far more to digital system design than designing such simple
modules.
Upon completion of a course using this book, students should be
prepared to practice digital design in industry. They will lack experience,
but they will have all of the tools they need for contemporary practice of
this noble art. The experience will come with time.
This book has grown out of more than 25 years of teaching digital design
to undergraduates (CS181 at Caltech, 6.004 at MIT, EE121 and EE108A at
Stanford). It is also motivated by 35 years of experience designing digital
systems in industry (Bell Labs, Digital Equipment, Cray, Avici, Velio
Communications, Stream Processors, and NVIDIA). It combines these two
experiences to teach what students need to know to function in industry in a
manner that has been proven to work on generations of students. The
VHDL guide in Appendix B is informed by nearly a decade of teaching
VHDL to undergraduates at UBC (EECE 353 and EECE 259).
We wrote this book because we were unable to find a book that covered
the system-level aspects of digital design. The vast majority of textbooks on
this topic teach the manual design of combinational and sequential logic
circuits and stop. While most texts today use a hardware description
language, the vast majority teach a TTL-esque design style that, while
appropriate in the era of 7400 quad NAND gate parts (the 1970s), does not
prepare a student to work on the design of a three-billion-transistor GPU.
Today’s students need to understand how to factor a state machine, partition
a design, and construct an interface with correct timing. We cover these

--- Page 22 ---
topics in a simple way that conveys insight without getting bogged down in
details.
Outline of the book
A flow chart showing the organization of the book and the dependences
between chapters is shown in Figure 1. The book is divided into an
introduction, five main sections, and chapters about style and verification.
Appendix B provides a summary of VHDL-2008 syntax.

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 1. Organization of the book and dependences between chapters.
Part I Introduction

--- Page 24 ---
Chapter 1 introduces digital systems. It covers the representation of
information as digital signals, noise margins, and the role of digital logic in
the modern world. The practice of digital design in industry is described in
Chapter 2. This includes the design process, modern implementation
technologies, computer-aided design tools, and Moore’s law.
Part II Combinational logic
Chapters 3–9 deal with combinational logic circuits – digital circuits whose
outputs depend only on the current values of their inputs. Boolean algebra,
the theoretical underpinning of logic design, is discussed in Chapter 3.
Switching logic and CMOS gate circuits are introduced in Chapter 4.
Chapter 5 introduces simple models for calculating the delay and power of
CMOS circuits. Manual methods for designing combinational circuits from
basic gates are described in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 discusses how to automate
the design process by coding behavioral descriptions of combinational logic
in the VHDL hardware description language. Building blocks for
combinational logic, decoders, multiplexers, etc. are described in Chapter 8,
and several examples of combinational design are given in Chapter 9.
Part III Arithmetic circuits
Chapters 10–13 describe number systems and arithmetic circuits. Chapter
10 describes the basics of number representation and arithmetic circuits that
perform the four functions +, −, ×, and ÷ on integers. Fixed-point and
floating-point number representations and their accuracy are presented in
Chapter 11. This chapter includes a discussion of floating-point unit design.
Techniques for building fast arithmetic circuits, including carry look-ahead,
Wallace trees, and Booth recoding, are described in Chapter 12. Finally,
examples of arithmetic circuits and systems are presented in Chapter 13.
Part IV Synchronous sequential logic
Chapters 14–19 describe synchronous sequential logic circuits – sequential
circuits whose state changes only on clock edges – and the process of
designing finite-state machines. After describing the basics in Chapter 14,
timing constraints are covered in Chapter 15. The design of datapath

--- Page 25 ---
sequential circuits – whose behavior is described by an equation rather than
a state table – is the topic of Chapter 16. Chapter 17 describes how to factor
complex state machines into several smaller, simpler state machines. The
concept of stored program control, and how to build finite-state machines
using microcoded engines, is described in Chapter 18. This section closes
with a number of examples in Chapter 19.
Part V Practical design
Chapter 20 and the Appendix discuss two important aspects of working on
digital design projects. The process of verifying the correctness of logic and
testing that it works after manufacturing are the topics of Chapter 20. The
Appendix teaches the student proper VHDL coding style. It is a style that is
readable, maintainable, and enables CAD tools to produce optimized
hardware. Students should read this chapter before, during, and after writing
their own VHDL.
Part VI System design
Chapters 21–25 discuss system design and introduce a systematic method
for the design and analysis of digital systems. A six-step process for system
design is introduced in Chapter 21. System-level timing and conventions for
the timing of interfaces are discussed in Chapter 22. Chapter 23 describes
pipelining of modules and systems, and includes several example pipelines.
System interconnects including buses, crossbar switches, and networks are
described in Chapter 24. A discussion of memory systems is given in
Chapter 25.
Part VII Asynchronous logic
Chapters 26–29 discuss asynchronous sequential circuits – circuits whose
state changes in response to any input change, without waiting for a clock
edge. The basics of asynchronous design including flow-table analysis and
synthesis and the problem of races are introduced in Chapter 26. Chapter 27
gives an example of these techniques, analyzing flip-flops and latches as
asynchronous circuits. The problem of metastability and synchronization
failure is described in Chapter 28. This section, and the book, closes with a

--- Page 26 ---
discussion of synchronizer design – how to design circuits that safely move
signals across asynchronous boundaries – in Chapter 29.
Teaching using this book
This book is suitable for use in a one-quarter (10-week) or one-semester
(13-week) introductory course on digital systems design. It can also be used
as the primary text of a second, advanced, course on digital systems.
There need not be any formal prerequisites for a course using this book.
A good understanding of high-school-level mathematics is the only required
preparation. Except for Chapters 5 and 28, the only place derivatives are
used, the material does not require a knowledge of calculus. At Stanford,
E40 (Introduction to Electrical Engineering) is a prerequisite for EE108A
(Digital Systems I), but students often take EE108A without the prerequisite
with no problems.
A one-quarter introductory course on digital systems design covers the
material in Chapters 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, (11), 14, 15, 16, (17), 21, 22, (23), 26,
28, and 29. For the one-quarter course we omit the details of CMOS circuits
(Chapters 4 and 5), microcode (Chapter 18), and the more advanced
systems topics (Chapters 24 and 25). The three chapters in parentheses are
optional and can be skipped to give a slightly slower-paced course. In
offerings of this course at Stanford, we typically administer two midterm
examinations: one after covering Chapter 11, and the second after covering
Chapter 22.
A one-semester introductory course on digital systems can use the three
additional weeks to include the material on CMOS circuits and a few of the
more advanced systems topics. A typical semester-long course covers the
material in Chapters 1, 2, 3, 4, (5), 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, (11), 13, 14, 15, 16, (17),
(18), (19), 21, 22, (23), (24), (25), 26, (27), 28, and 29.
This book can be used for an advanced course on digital systems design.
Such a course covers the material from the introductory courses in more
depth and includes advanced topics that were omitted from the introductory
courses. Such a course usually includes a significant student project.

--- Page 27 ---
Materials
To support teaching with this book, the course website includes teaching
materials: lecture slides, a series of laboratories, and solutions to selected
exercises. The laboratories are intended to reinforce the material in the
course and can be performed via simulation or a combination of simulation
and implementation on FPGAs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 28 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are deeply indebted to the many people who have made contributions to
the creation of this book. This book has evolved over many years of
teaching digital design at MIT (6.004) and Stanford (EE108A). We thank
the many generations of students who took early versions of this class and
provided feedback that led to constant refinement of our approach.
Professors Subhasish Mitra, Phil Levis, and My Le have taught at Stanford
using early versions of this material, and have provided valuable comments
that led to many improvements. The course and book benefited from
contributions by many great teaching assistants over the years. Paul Hartke,
David Black-Shaffer, Frank Nothaft, and David Schneider deserve special
thanks. Frank also deserves thanks for contributing to the exercise
solutions. Teaching 6.004 at MIT with Gill Pratt, Greg Papadopolous, Steve
Ward, Bert Halstead, and Anant Agarwal helped develop the approach to
teaching digital design that is captured in this book. An early draft of the
VHDL edition of this book was used for EECE 259 at the University of
British Columbia (UBC). We thank the students who provided feedback that
led to refinements in this version. The treatment of VHDL-2008 in
Appendix B has been informed by several years of experience teaching
earlier VHDL versions in EECE 353 at UBC using a set of slides originally
developed by Professor Steve Wilton. Steve also provided helpful feedback
on an early draft of the VHDL edition.
Julie Lancashire and Kerry Cahill at Cambridge University Press helped
throughout the original Verilog edition, and Julie Lancashire, Karyn Bailey,
and Jessica Murphy at Cambridge Press helped with the current VHDL
edition. We thank Irene Pizzie for careful copy editing of the original
Verilog edition and Abigail Jones for shepherding the original Verilog
edition through the sometimes difficult passage from manuscript to finished
project. We thank Steven Holt for careful copy editing of the present VHDL
edition you see before you.
Finally, our families: Sharon, Jenny, Katie, and Liza Dally, and Jacki
Armiak, Eric Harting, and Susanna Temkin, and Dayna and Ethan Aamodt
have offered tremendous support and made significant sacrifices so we
could have time to devote to writing.

--- Page 29 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 30 ---
Part I
Introduction
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 31 ---
1
The digital abstraction
Digital systems are pervasive in modern society. Some uses of digital
technology are obvious – such as a personal computer or a network
switch. However, there are also many other applications of digital
technology. When you speak on the phone, in almost all cases your voice
is being digitized and transmitted via digital communications equipment.
When you listen to an audio file, the music, recorded in digital form, is
processed by digital logic to correct errors and improve the audio quality.
When you watch TV, the image is transmitted in a digital format and
processed by digital electronics. If you have a DVR (digital video
recorder) you are recording video in digital form. DVDs are compressed
digital video recordings. When you play a DVD or stream a movie, you
are digitally decompressing and processing the video. Most
communication radios, such as cell phones and wireless networks, use
digital signal processing to implement their modems. The list goes on.
Most modern electronics uses analog circuitry only at the edge – to
interface to a physical sensor or actuator. As quickly as possible, signals
from a sensor (e.g., a microphone) are converted into digital form. All
real processing, storage, and transmission of information is done
digitally. The signals are converted back to analog form only at the
output – to drive an actuator (e.g., a speaker) or control other analog
systems.
Not so long ago, the world was not as digital. In the 1960s digital logic
was found only in expensive computer systems and a few other niche
applications. All TVs, radios, music recordings, and telephones were
analog.
The shift to digital was enabled by the scaling of integrated circuits. As
integrated circuits became more complex, more sophisticated signal

--- Page 32 ---
processing became possible. Complex techniques such as modulation,
error correction, and compression were not feasible in analog technology.
Only digital logic, with its ability to perform computations without
accumulating noise and its ability to represent signals with arbitrary
precision, could implement these signal processing algorithms.
In this book we will look at how the digital systems that form such a
large part of our lives function and how they are designed.
1.1 DIGITAL SIGNALS
Digital systems store, process, and transport information in digital form.
Digital information is represented as discrete symbols that are encoded into
ranges of a physical quantity. Most often we represent information with just
two symbols, “0” and “1,” and encode these symbols into voltage ranges as
shown in Figure 1.1. Any voltage in the ranges labeled “0” and “1”
represents a “0” or “1” symbol, respectively. Voltages between these two
ranges, in the region labeled “?,” are undefined and represent neither
symbol. Voltages outside the ranges, below the “0” range, or above the “1”
range are not allowed and may permanently damage the system if they
occur. We call a signal encoded in the manner shown in Figure 1.1 a binary
signal because it has two valid states.
Figure 1.1. Encoding of two symbols, 0 and 1, into voltage ranges. Any voltage in the range labeled
0 is considered to be a 0 symbol. Any voltage in the range labeled 1 is considered to be a 1 symbol.
Voltages between the 0 and 1 ranges (the ? range) are undefined and represent neither symbol.
Voltages outside the 0 and 1 ranges may cause permanent damage to the equipment receiving the
signals.
Table 1.1 shows the JEDEC JESD8-5 standard [62] for encoding a binary
digital signal in a system with a 2.5 V power supply. Using this standard,
any signal with a voltage between −0.3 V and 0.7 V is considered to be a
“0,” and a signal with a voltage between 1.7 V and 2.8 V is considered to be
a “1.” Signals that do not fall into these two ranges are undefined. If a
signal is below −0.3 V or above 2.8 V, it may cause damage.1

--- Page 33 ---
Table 1.1. Encoding of binary signals for 2.5 V LVCMOS logic
Signals with voltage in [−0.3, 0.7] are considered to be a 0. Signals with voltage in [1.7, 2.8]
areconsideredtobea1.Voltagesin[0.7, 1.7] are undefined. Voltages outside [−0.3, 2.8] may cause
permanent damage.
Parameter Value Description
Vmin −0.3 V absolute minimum voltage below which damage
occurs
V0   0.0 V nominal voltage representing logic “0”
VOL   0.2 V maximum output voltage representing logic “0”
VIL   0.7 V maximum voltage considered to be a logic “0”
by a module input
VIH   1.7 V minimum voltage considered to be a logic “1”
by a module input
VOH   2.1 V minimum output voltage representing logic “1”
V1   2.5 V nominal voltage representing logic “1”
Vmax   2.8 V absolute maximum voltage above which
damage occurs
Digital systems are not restricted to binary signals. One can generate a
digital signal that can take on three, four, or any finite number of discrete
values. However, there are few advantages to using more than two values,
and the circuits that store and operate on binary signals are simpler and
more robust than their multi-valued counterparts. Thus, except for a few
niche applications, binary signals are universal in digital systems today.
Digital signals can also be encoded using physical quantities other than
voltage. Almost any physical quantity that can be easily manipulated and
sensed can be used to represent a digital signal. Systems have been built
using electrical current, air or fluid pressure, and physical position to
represent digital signals. However, the tremendous capability of
manufacturing complex systems as low-cost CMOS integrated circuits has
made voltage signals universal.
1.2 DIGITAL SIGNALS TOLERATE NOISE

--- Page 34 ---
The main reason why digital systems have become so pervasive, and what
distinguishes them from analog systems, is that they can process, transport,
and store information without it being distorted by noise. This is possible
because of the discrete nature of digital information. A binary signal
represents either a 0 or a 1. If you take the voltage that represents a 1, V1,
and disturb it with a small amount of noise, 
, it still represents a 1. There is
no loss of information with the addition of noise, until the noise becomes
large enough to push the signal out of the 1 range. In most systems it is easy
to bound the noise to be less than this value.
Figure 1.2 compares the effect of noise on an analog system (Figure
1.2(a)) and on a digital system (Figure 1.2(b)). In an analog system,
information is represented by an analog voltage, V. For example, we might
represent temperature (in degrees Fahrenheit) with voltage according to the
relation V = 0.2(T−68). So a temperature of 72.5 °F is represented by a
voltage of 900 mV. This representation is continuous; every voltage
corresponds to a different temperature. Thus, if we disturb the signal V with
a noise voltage 
, the resulting signal V + 
  corresponds to a different
temperature. If 
  = 100 mV, for example, the new signal V + 
  = 1 V
corresponds to a temperature of 73 °F (T = 5V + 68), which is different
from the original temperature of 72.5 °F.
Figure 1.2. Effects of noise in analog and digital systems. (a) In an analog system, perturbing a
signal V by noise 
 results in a degraded signal V + 
. Operating on this degraded signal with a
function f gives a result f(V + 
) that is different from the result of operating on the signal without
noise. (b) In a digital system, adding noise 
 to a signal V1 representing a symbol, 1, gives a signal V1
+ 
  that still represents the symbol 1. Operating on this signal with a function f gives the same result
f(V1) as operating on the signal without the noise.

--- Page 35 ---
In a digital system, each bit of the signal is represented by a voltage, V1
or V0 depending on whether the bit is 1 or 0. If a noise source perturbs a
digital 1 signal V1, for example, as shown in Figure 1.2(b), the resulting
voltage V1 + 
  still represents a 1 and applying a function to this noisy
signal gives the same result as applying a function to the original signal.
Moreover, if a temperature of 72 °F is represented by a three-bit digital
signal with value 010 (see Figure 1.7(c)), the signal still represents a
temperature of 72 °F even after all three bits of the signal have been
disturbed by noise – as long as the noise is not so great as to push any bit of
the signal out of the valid range.
To prevent noise from accumulating to the point where it pushes a digital
signal out of the valid 1 or 0 range, we periodically restore digital signals as
illustrated in Figure 1.3. After transmitting, storing, and retrieving, or
operating on a digital signal, it may be disturbed from its nominal value Va
(where a is 0 or 1) by some noise 
i. Without restoration (Figure 1.3(a)), the
noise accumulates after each operation and eventually will overwhelm the
signal. To prevent accumulation, we restore the signal after each operation.
The restoring device, which we call a buffer, outputs V0 if its input lies in
the 0 range and V1 if its output lies in the 1 range. The buffer, in effect,
restores the signal to be a pristine 0 or 1, removing any additive noise.
Figure 1.3. Restoration of digital signals. (a) Without restoration, signals accumulate noise and will
eventually accumulate enough noise to cause an error. (b) By restoring the signal to its proper value
after each operation, noise is prevented from accumulating.

--- Page 36 ---
This capability to restore a signal to its noiseless state after each
operation enables digital systems to carry out complex high-precision
processing. Analog systems are limited to performing a small number of
operations on relatively low-precision signals because noise is accumulated
during each operation. After a large number of operations, the signal is
swamped by noise. Since all voltages are valid analog signals, there is no
way to restore the signal to a noiseless state between operations. Analog
systems are also limited in precision. They cannot represent a signal with an
accuracy finer than the background noise level. Digital systems can perform
an indefinite number of operations, and, as long as the signal is restored
after each operation, no noise is accumulated. Digital systems can also
represent signals of arbitrary precision without corruption by noise.2
In practice, buffers and other restoring logic devices do not guarantee
output voltages of exactly V0 or V1. Variations in power supplies, device
parameters, and other factors lead the outputs to vary slightly from these
nominal values. As illustrated in Figure 1.4(b), all restoring logic devices
guarantee that their 0 (1) outputs fall into a 0 (1) range that is narrower than
the input 0 (1) range. Specifically, all 0 signals are guaranteed to be less
than VOL and all 1 signals are guaranteed to be greater than VOH. To ensure
that the signal is able to tolerate some amount of noise, we insist that VOL <
VIL and that VIH < VOH. For example, the values of VOL and VOH for 2.5 V
LVCMOS are shown in Table 1.1. We can quantify the amount of noise that
can be tolerated as the noise margins of the signal:
VNMH = VOH − VIH,
VNML = VIL − VOL. (1.1)


--- Page 37 ---
Figure 1.4. Input and output voltage ranges. (a) Inputs of logic modules interpret signals as shown in
Figure 1.1. (b) Outputs of logic modules restore signals to narrower ranges of valid voltages.
While one might assume that a bigger noise margin would be better, this
is not necessarily the case. Most noise in digital systems is induced by
signal transitions, and hence tends to be proportional to the signal swing.
Thus, what is really important is the ratio of the noise margin to the signal
swing, VNM/(V1 − V0), rather than the absolute magnitude of the noise
margin.
Figure 1.5 shows the relationship between DC input voltage and output
voltage for a logic module. The horizontal axis shows the module input
voltage and the vertical axis shows the module output voltage. To conform
to our definition of restoring, the transfer curve for all modules must lie
entirely within the shaded region of the figure so that an input signal in the
valid 0 or 1 range will result in an output signal in the narrower output 0 or
1 range. Non-inverting modules, like the buffer of Figure 1.3, have transfer
curves similar to the solid line. Inverting modules have transfer curves
similar to the dashed line. In either case, gain is required to implement a
restoring logic module. The absolute value of the maximum slope of the
signal is bounded by
(1.2)

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 1.5. DC transfer curve for a logic module. For an input in the valid ranges, Vmin ≤ Vin ≤ VIL or
VIH ≤ Vin ≤ Vmax, the output must be in the valid output ranges Vout ≤ VOL or VOH ≤ Vout. Thus, all
valid curves must stay in the shaded region. This requires that the module have gain > 1 in the invalid
input region. The solid curve shows a typical transfer function for a non-inverting module. The
dashed curve shows a typical transfer function for an inverting module.
From this we conclude that restoring logic modules must be active elements
capable of providing gain.
EXAMPLE 1.1 Noise toleration
Figure 1.6 illustrates a noise model where noise (modeled by the two voltage sources) can displace
the voltage on the output of a buffer Va by up to 0.5 V in the positive direction and up to 0.4 V in the
negative direction. That is, the additive noise voltage Vn ∈  [−0.4, 0.5]. For an output voltage of Va,
the voltage on the input of the following buffer is Va + Vn ∈  [Va − 0.4, Va + 0.5]. Using this noise
model and the input and damage constraints of Table 1.1, calculate the range of legal values both for
low and for high outputs.
Figure 1.6. Noise model for Example 1.1.

--- Page 39 ---
There are four constraints that must be satisfied when calculating the output voltage. A low output
(VOL) must give an input voltage that is detected as low (VOL+Vn ≤ VIL) and not damage the chip
(VOL−Vn ≥ Vmin). The high voltage (VOH) cannot damage the chip (VOH+Vn ≤ Vmax) and must be
sensed as high (VOH − Vn ≥ VIH). So we have
The output voltage from each buffer must be between 0.1 V and 0.2 V to represent “0” and between
2.1 V and 2.3 V to represent “1.” Although not acceptable with this noise model, almost all circuits
will run with nominal output voltages of 0 V and VDD (the supply) to represent 0 and 1.
1.3 DIGITAL SIGNALS REPRESENT
COMPLEX DATA
Some information is naturally binary in nature and can be represented with
a single binary digital signal (Figure 1.7(a)). Truth propositions or
predicates fall into this category. For example, a single signal can indicate
that a door is open, a light is on, a seatbelt is buckled, or a button is pressed.

--- Page 40 ---
Figure 1.7. Representing information with digital signals. (a) Binary-valued predicates are
represented by a single-bit signal. (b) Elements of sets with more than two elements are represented
by a group of signals. In this case one of eight colors is denoted by a three-bit signal Color2:0. (c) A
continuous quantity, like temperature, is quantized, and the resulting set of values is encoded by a
group of signals. Here one of eight temperatures can be encoded as a three-bit signal TempA2:0 or as a
seven-bit thermometer-coded signal TempB6:0 with at most one transition from 0 to 1.
By convention, we often consider a signal to be “true” when the voltage
is high. This need not be the case, as nothing precludes using low voltages
to represent the above conditions. Throughout the book we will try to make
it clear when we are using this low–true convention. The signal description
in such cases will often be changed instead, e.g., “a seatbelt is unbuckled.”
Often we need to represent information that is not binary in nature: a day
of the year, the value and suit of a playing card, the temperature in a room,
or a color. We encode information with more than two natural states using a
group of binary signals (Figure 1.7(b)). The elements of a set with N
elements can be represented by a signal with n = ⌈ log2 N⌉  bits. For example,
the eight colors shown in Figure 1.7(b) can be represented by three one-bit
signals, Color0, Color1, and Color2. For convenience we refer to this group
of three signals as a single multi-bit signal Color2:0. In a circuit or
schematic diagram, rather than drawing three lines for these three signals,

--- Page 41 ---
we draw a single line with a slash indicating that it is a multi-bit signal and
the number “3” near the slash to indicate that it is composed of three bits.3
Continuous quantities, such as voltage, temperature, and pressure, are
encoded as digital signals by quantizing them. This reduces the problem to
one of representing elements of a set. Suppose, for example, that we need to
represent temperatures between 68 °F and 82 °F and that it suffices to
resolve the temperature to an accuracy of 2 °F. We quantize this temperature
range into eight discrete values as shown in Figure 1.7(c). We can represent
this range with binary weighted signals TempA2:0, where the temperature
represented is
(1.3)
Alternatively, we can represent this range with a seven-bit thermometer-
coded signal TempB6:0:
(1.4)
Many other encodings of this set are possible. A designer chooses a
representation depending on the task at hand. Some sensors (e.g.,
thermometers) naturally generate thermometer-coded signals. In some
applications it is important that adjacent codes differ in only a single bit. At
other times, cost and complexity are reduced by minimizing the number of
bits needed to represent an element of the set. We will revisit digital
representations of continuous quantities when we discuss numbers and
arithmetic in Chapter 10.
1.3.1Representing the day of the year
Suppose we wish to represent the day of the year with a digital signal. (We
will ignore for now the problem of leap years.) The signal is to be used for
operations that include determining the next day (i.e., given the

--- Page 42 ---
representation of today, compute the representation of tomorrow), testing
whether two days are in the same month, determining whether one day
comes before another, and whether a day is a particular day of the week.
One approach is to use a ⌈ log2 365 ⌉  = 9-bit signal that represents the
integers from 0 to 364, where 0 represents January 1 and 364 represents
December 31. This representation is compact (you cannot do it in fewer
than nine bits), and it makes it easy to determine whether one day comes
before another. However, it does not facilitate the other two operations we
need to perform. To determine the month a day corresponds to requires
comparing the signal with ranges for each month (January is 0–30,
February is 31–58, etc.). Determining the day of the week requires taking
the date integer modulo 7.
A better approach, for our purposes, is to represent the signal as a four-bit
month field (January = 1, December = 12) and a five-bit day field (1–31,
leaving 0 unused). With this representation, for example, July 4 (US
Independence Day) is 0111 001002. The 01112 = 7 represents July and
001002 = 4 represents the day. With this representation we can still directly
compare whether one day comes before another and also easily test whether
two days are in the same month by comparing the upper four bits. However,
it is even more difficult with this representation to determine the day of the
week.
To solve the problem of the day of the week, we use a redundant
representation that consists of a four-bit month field (1–12), a five-bit day
of the month field (1–31), and a three-bit day of the week field (Sunday = 1,
. . . , Saturday = 7). With this representation, July 4 (which is a Monday in
2016) would be represented as the 12-bit binary number 0111 00100 100.
The 0111 means month 7, or July, 00100 means day 4 of the month, and
100 means day 4 of the week, or Wednesday.
1.3.2Representing subtractive colors
We often pick a representation to simplify carrying out operations. For
example, suppose we wish to represent colors using a subtractive system. In
a subtractive system we start with white (all colors) and filter this with one
or more primary color (red, blue, or yellow) transparent filters. For
example, if we start with white then use a red filter we get red. If we then

--- Page 43 ---
add a blue filter we get purple, and so on. By filtering white with the
primary colors we can generate the derived colors purple, orange, green,
and black.
One possible representation for colors is shown in Table 1.2. In this
representation we use one bit to denote each of the primary colors. If this bit
is set, a filter of that primary color is in place. We start with white
represented as all zeros – no filters in place. Each primary color has exactly
one bit set – only the filter of that primary color in place. The derived colors
orange, purple, and green each have two bits set since they are generated by
two primary color filters. Finally, black is generated by using all three
filters, and hence has all three bits set.
Table 1.2. Three-bit representation of colors
This can be derived by filtering white light with zero or more primary colors; the representation is
chosen so that mixing two colors is the equivalent of OR-ing the representations together
Color Code
White 000
Red 001
Yellow 010
Blue 100
Orange 011
Purple 101
Green 110
Black 111
It is easy to see that, using this representation, the operation of mixing
two colors together (adding two filters) is equivalent to the operation of
taking the logical OR of the two representations. For example, if we mix
red 001 with blue 100 we get purple 101, and 001 ∨  100 = 101.4
1.4 DIGITAL LOGIC FUNCTIONS
Once we have represented information as digital signals, we use digital
logic circuits to compute logical functions of our signals. That is, the logic

--- Page 44 ---
computes an output digital signal that is a function of the input digital
signal(s).
Suppose we wish to build a thermostat that turns on a fan if the
temperature is higher than a preset limit. Figure 1.8 shows how this can be
accomplished with a single comparator, a digital logic block that compares
two numbers and outputs a binary signal that indicates whether one is
greater than the other. (We will examine how to build comparators in
Section 8.6.) The comparator takes two temperatures as input: the current
temperature from a temperature sensor and the preset limit temperature. If
the current temperature is greater than the limit temperature, the output of
the comparator goes high, turning the fan on. This digital thermostat is an
example of a combinational logic circuit, a logic circuit whose output
depends only on the current state of its inputs. We will study combinational
logic in Chapters 6–13.
Figure 1.8. A digital thermostat is realized with a comparator. The comparator turns a fan on when
the current temperature is larger than a preset temperature.
EXAMPLE 1.2 Current day circuit
Suppose we wish to build a calendar circuit that always outputs the current day in the month, day of
month, day of week representation described in Section 1.3.1. This circuit, shown in Figure 1.9,
requires storage. A register stores the current day (current month, day of month, and day of week),
making it available on its output and ignoring its input until the clock rises. When the clock signal
rises, the register updates its contents with the value on its input and then resumes its storage
function.5 A logic circuit computes the value of tomorrow from the value of today. This circuit
increments the two day fields and takes appropriate action if they overflow. We present the
implementation of this logic circuit in Section 9.2. Once a day (at midnight) the clock signal rises,
causing the register to update its contents with tomorrow’s value. Our digital calendar is an example
of a sequential logic circuit. Its output depends not only on current inputs (the clock), but also on the
internal state (today), which reflects the value of past inputs. We will study sequential logic in
Chapters 14–19.

--- Page 45 ---
Figure 1.9. A digital calendar outputs the current day in the month, day of month, day of week
format. A register stores the value of the current day (today). A logic circuit computes the value of the
next day (tomorrow).
We often build digital systems by composing subsystems. Or, from a
different perspective, we design a digital system by partitioning it into
combinational and sequential subsystems and then designing each
subsystem. As a very simple example, suppose we want to modify our
thermostat so that the fan does not run on Sundays. We can do this by
combining our thermostat circuit with our calendar circuit, as shown in
Figure 1.10. The calendar circuit is used only for its day of week (DoW)
output. This output is compared with the constant Sunday = 1. The output
of the comparator is true if today is Sunday (ItsSunday). An inverter, also
called a NOT gate, complements this value. Its output (ItsNotSunday) is
true if it is not Sunday. Finally, an AND gate combines the inverter output
with the output of the thermostat. The output of the AND gate is true only
when the temperature is high AND it’s not Sunday. System-level design – at
a somewhat higher level than this simple example – is the topic of Chapters
21–25.

--- Page 46 ---
Figure 1.10. By combining our thermostat and calendar circuits, we realize a circuit that turns the fan
on when the temperature is high, except on Sundays, when the fan remains off.
1.5 VHDL DESCRIPTION OF DIGITAL
CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
VHDL is a hardware description language (HDL) that is used to describe
digital circuits and systems. Once a system has been described in VHDL,
we can simulate its operation using a VHDL simulator. We can also
synthesize the circuit using a synthesis program (similar to a compiler) to
convert the VHDL description to a gate-level description to be mapped to
standard cells or an FPGA. VHDL and Verilog are the two HDLs in wide
use today. Most chips and systems in industry are designed by writing
descriptions in one of these two languages.
We will use VHDL throughout this book both to illustrate principles and
also to teach VHDL coding style. By the end of a course using this book,
the reader should be proficient in both reading and writing VHDL.
Appendix A gives a style guide for writing VHDL and Appendix B provides
an overview of VHDL syntax.
A VHDL description of our thermostat example is shown in Figure 1.11.
Note that this VHDL describes the behavior of the circuit but not how the
circuit is implemented. A synthesis program can transform this VHDL into
hardware, but neither the synthesis program nor that hardware can be said
to “execute” the VHDL. VHDL is a strongly typed language. This means
that for each signal we must explicitly declare a type indicating the
representation of that signal. VHDL includes a set of standard logic types

--- Page 47 ---
defined by the IEEE 1164 standard. To enable us to use them, the first line
in the example specifies that our design will use a VHDL library called
IEEE. A library includes previously compiled VHDL code organized in a
set of packages. The second line, beginning with the keyword use, is a use
clause indicating that we wish to use all design units defined in the
package std_logic_1164 within the library IEEE. Our example uses the
types std_logic and std_logic_vector. The type std_logic represents a
single bit, which can take on values ’0’, ’1’ along with some special
values ’-’, ’Z’, ’X’, ’W’, ’L’, ’H’ and ’U’ that we will see are useful for
logic synthesis and/or simulation. The type std_logic_vector represents a
multi-bit signal, where each bit has type std_logic. Our thermostat will
need to compare the value of the current temperature against the preset
temperature (e.g., using >).
Figure 1.11. VHDL description of our thermostat example.
In the example the thermostat is described using a VHDL design entity
consisting of two parts, an entity declaration and an architecture body. The
entity declaration defines the interface between the design entity and the
outside world, whereas the architecture body defines the internal operation
of the design entity.
The entity declaration begins with the keyword entity. In our example
the entity declaration indicates that the design entity’s name is THERMOSTAT.
Note that VHDL is case insensitive. For example, this means THERMOSTAT is
considered by the tools as identical if written all in lower case (thermostat)
or using mixed case (e.g., Thermostat). This case insensitivity applies both

--- Page 48 ---
to identifiers and to keywords. In Figure 1.11 we have used different
capitalization to emphasize VHDL’s case insensitivity. The inputs and
outputs to the design entity are specified in a port list that begins with the
keyword port. The port list contains three signals: presetTemp,
currentTemp, and fanOn. The keyword in indicates that the two
temperature signals presentTemp and currentTemp are inputs. These three-
bit signals are declared to have type std_logic_vector and can take on
values between "000" and "111", representing the unsigned integers
between 0 and 7. The “(2 downto 0)” indicates that presentTemp has
subsignals presentTemp(2), presentTemp(1), and presentTemp(0). Here
the most significant bit is presentTemp(2). Note that we could have
declared presentTemp with “(0 to 2),” in which case the most significant
bit would be presentTemp(0). The keyword out indicates that the signal
fanOn is an output of the design entity. Since it represents a single bit,
fanOn is declared with type std_logic.
The architecture body begins with the keyword architecture followed
by an identifier for the architecture body, impl (short for
“implementation”), then the keyword of and then the name of the entity
declaration this architecture body corresponds to (Thermostat). Although
most design entities have a single architecture body, the VHDL language
allows multiple architecture bodies, each of which should have a unique
identifier. Next are the keywords is and begin followed by the code that
defines the behavior of the architecture body. In this example the
architecture body consists of a single concurrent assignment statement. The
signal assignment compound delimiter, <=, indicates that the expression on
the right is assigned to the signal on the left. The keywords when and else
indicate that this is a conditional signal assignment statement. The
conditional signal assignment sets fanOn to logic value ’1’ whenever
currentTemp is greater than presetTemp and to ’0’ otherwise. The
conditional signal assignment statement ends with a semicolon (;).
The result of simulating this design entity with presetTemp "011" (i.e.,
3) and currentTemp sweeping from "000" to "111" is shown in Figure 1.12.

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 1.12. Result of simulating the VHDL of Figure 1.11 with presetTemp = "011" (i.e., 3) and
currentTemp sweeping from "000" to "111" (i.e., 7).
Despite the unfamiliar syntax, at first glance VHDL code may look
somewhat like a conventional programming language such as C or Java.
However, VHDL, or any other HDL, is fundamentally different than a
programming language. In a programming language like C, only one
statement is active at a time. Statements are executed one at a time in
sequence. In VHDL, on the other hand, all design entities and all concurrent
assignment statements in each component are active all of the time. That is,
all of the statements are executed all of the time.
It is very important in coding VHDL to keep in mind that the code is
ultimately being compiled into hardware. Each component instantiated adds
a hardware component to the design. Each assignment statement in each
design entity adds gates to each instance of that design entity. VHDL can be
a tremendous productivity multiplier – allowing the designer to work at a
much higher level than if the gates had to be manually synthesized. At the
same time, VHDL can be an impediment if its abstraction causes the
designer to lose touch with the end product and write an inefficient design.
1.6 DIGITAL LOGIC IN SYSTEMS
Most modern electronic systems, from cell phones to televisions to the
embedded engine controller in your car, have the form shown in Figure
1.13. These systems are divided into an analog front end, one or more
processors, and fixed-function digital logic blocks. These components
represent the hardware of a system. Because analog circuitry accumulates
noise and has limited levels of integration, we use it as little as possible. In
a modern system, analog circuitry is limited to the periphery of the system

--- Page 50 ---
and to signal conditioning and conversion from analog to digital and vice
versa.
Figure 1.13. A modern digital electronic system consists of an analog front end, one or more
processors, which perform the complex, but less demanding, parts of an application, and digital logic
blocks that perform the computationally intensive parts of the application.
Programmable processors, which are built using digital logic, perform the
system functions that are complex but not computationally intense. The
processor itself can be fairly simple; the complexity is in the software
running on the processor, which can involve millions of lines of code.
Complex user interfaces, system logic, undemanding applications, and other
such functions are implemented in software running on the processor.
However, because the area (and energy) required to implement a function
on a processor is from 10 to 1000 times higher than that required to
implement the function in a fixed-function logic block, the most
computationally demanding functions are implemented directly in logic, not
in software running on the processor.
The fixed-function logic blocks in a typical system perform most of the
system’s computation, as measured by the number of operations, but
account for only a small fraction of the system’s complexity, as measured
by lines of code. Fixed-function logic is used to implement functions such

--- Page 51 ---
as radio modems, video encoders and decoders, encryption and decryption
functions, and other such blocks. It is not unusual for a modem or codec to
perform 1010 to 1011 operations per second while consuming the same
amount of power as a processor that is performing 108 to 109 operations per
second. If you watch a streaming video on your cell phone, most of the
operations being performed are taking place in the radio modem, which
decodes the RF waveform into symbols, and the video codec, which
decodes those symbols into pixels. Very little computation, relatively
speaking, is taking place on the ARM processor that controls the process.
This book deals with the design and analysis of digital logic. In the
system of Figure 1.13, digital logic can be found in all of the blocks,
including in the glue that connects them together. Digital logic controls,
sequences, calibrates, and corrects the A/D and D/A converters in the
analog front end. The processor, while its function is defined by software, is
built from digital logic. Digital logic implements the fixed-function blocks.
Finally, digital logic implements the buses and networks that allow these
blocks to communicate with one another.
Digital logic is the foundation on which modern electronic systems are
built. When you finish this book, you will have a basic understanding of
this foundational technology.
Summary
This chapter has given you an overview of digital design. We have seen that
representing signals digitally makes them tolerant of noise. Unless a noise
margin is exceeded, a digital signal corrupted by noise can be restored to its
original state. This enables us to perform complex calculations without
accumulating noise.
Information is represented as digital signals. Truth propositions, e.g., “the
door is open,” have just two values and thus can be directly represented
with a digital signal. We represent elements of a set, e.g., the day of the
week, with a multi-bit digital signal by assigning a binary code to each
element of the set. Continuous values, such as the voltage on a wire or the
temperature in a room, are represented by first quantizing the value –
mapping a continuous range onto a finite number of discrete steps – and
then representing these steps as elements of a set.

--- Page 52 ---
Digital logic circuits perform logical functions – computing digital output
signals whose values are functions of other digital signals. A combinational
logic circuit computes an output that is only a function of its present input.
A sequential logic circuit includes state feedback, and computes an output
that is a function not only of its current input, but also of its state and hence,
indirectly, of past inputs.
We describe digital logic functions in the VHDL hardware description
language for purposes of simulation and synthesis. We can simulate a
circuit described in VHDL, determining its response to a test input, to verify
its behavior. Once verified, we can synthesize the VHDL description into an
actual circuit for implementation. While VHDL at first glance looks a lot
like a conventional programming language, it is quite different. A
conventional program describes a step-by-step process where one line of
the program is executed at a time; however, a VHDL description describes
hardware, where all modules are executed simultaneously all of the time. A
style guide for VHDL is given in the Appendix.
Digital logic design is important because it forms the foundation of
modern electronic systems. These systems consist of analog front ends, one
or more processors, and digital fixed-function logic. Digital logic is used
both to implement the processors – which perform the functions that are
complex but not computationally intense – and the fixed-function logic –
which is where most of the computation occurs.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Charles Babbage is credited with designing the first calculating machines:
his difference engines [5]. Although he designed his Difference Engine No.
2 in the 1840s, it was complex and not completely built until 2002 [105].
He also planned an even more complex Analytical Engine with many
similarities to modern computers [18]. Other mechanical calculators existed
by the early 1900s. John Atanasoff was ruled by the US court system6 to
have invented the first digital computer at Iowa State in 1940–41. Atanasoff
writes about his invention 40 years later in ref. [4].
Robert Noyce (biography [11]) and Jack Kilby were co-inventors of the
integrated circuit [89]. After leaving Fairchild Semiconductor, Noyce
founded Intel with Gordon Moore. While at Intel, Moore made an
observation about the growth of the density of transistors on an integrated

--- Page 53 ---
circuit. This observation, Moore’s law [84], of exponential growth has held
for over 40 years.
One of the first examples of the high-level synthesis tools was Berkeley’s
BDSyn [99]. For further information about the VHDL language, please
refer to later chapters of this book, or the numerous online resources about
the language.
Exercises
1.1 Noise margins, I. Suppose you have a module that uses the encoding
described in Table 1.1 but you have freedom to choose either (VOL,
VOH) = (0.3, 2.2) or (VOL, VOH) = (0.1, 2.1). Which of these output
ranges would you choose and why?
1.2 Noise margins, II. Two wires have been placed close together on a
chip. They are so close, in fact, that the larger wire (the aggressor)
couples to the smaller wire (the victim) and causes the voltage on the
victim wire to change. Using the data from Table 1.1, determine the
following.
(a) If the victim wire is at VOL, what is the most the aggressor can
push it down without causing a problem?
(b) If the victim wire is at 0 V, what is the most the aggressor can
push it down without causing a problem?
(c) If the victim wire is at VOH, what is the most the aggressor can
push it down without causing a problem?
(d) If the victim wire is at V1, what is the most the aggressor can
push it up without causing a problem?
1.3 Power-supply noise. Two systems, A and B, use the encoding of Table
1.1 to send logic signals to one another. Suppose there is a voltage
shift between the two systems’ power supplies so that all voltages in A
are VN higher than in B. A voltage of Vx in system A appears as a
voltage of Vx + VN in system B. A voltage of Vx in system B appears as
a voltage of Vx −VN in system A. Assuming that there are no other
noise sources, over what range of VN will the system operate
properly?

--- Page 54 ---
1.4 Ground noise. A logic family has signal levels as shown in Table 1.3.
We connect device A’s output to B’s inputs using this logic family. All
signal levels are relative to the local ground. How much can the
ground voltages of the two devices (GNDA and GNDB) differ before
an error occurs? Compute the difference both for how much higher
GNDA can be relative to GNDB and for how much lower GNDA can
be relative to GNDB.
Table 1.3. Voltage levels for Exercise 1.4
Parameter Value
VOL 0.1 V
VIL 0.4 V
VIH 0.6 V
VOH 0.8 V
1.5 Proportional signal levels. A logic device encodes signals with levels
proportional to its power supply voltage (VDD) according to Table 1.4.
Table 1.4. Voltage levels for Exercise 1.5
Parameter Value
VOL 0.1VDD
VIL 0.4VDD
VIH 0.6VDD
VOH 0.9VDD
Suppose two such logic devices A and B send signals to one another
and the supply of device A is VDDA = 1.0 V. Assuming that there are
no other noise sources and that the two devices have a common
ground (i.e., 0 V is the same level in both devices), what is the range
of supply voltages for device B, VDDB, over which the system will
operate properly?
1.6 Noise margins, III. Using the proportional scheme of Exercise 1.5,
what is the lowest supply voltage (VDD) that can tolerate noise up to
100 mV?
1.7 Noise margins, IV. A logic family uses signal levels relative to VSS and
proportional to VDD as shown in Table 1.5. We connect two logic
devices A and B using this logic family with signals traveling in both

--- Page 55 ---
directions between the two devices. Both systems have VDD = 1 V,
and system A has VSSA = 0 V. Over what range of values for VSSB will
the system operate properly?
Table 1.5. Voltage levels for Exercise 1.7
Parameter Value
VOL 0.9VSS + 0.1VDD
VIL 0.7VSS + 0.3VDD
VIH 0.3VSS + 0.7VDD
VOH 0.1VSS + 0.9VDD
1.8 Gain of restoring devices. What is the minimum absolute value of
gain for a circuit that restores signals according to the values in Table
1.1?
1.9 Gray codes. A continuous value that has been quantized into N states
can be encoded into an n = ⌈ log2 N⌉  bit signal in which adjacent states
differ in at most one bit position. Show how the eight temperatures of
Figure 1.7(c) can be encoded into three bits in this manner. Make your
encoding such that the encodings of 82 °F and 68 °F also differ in just
one bit position.
1.10Encoding rules. Equations (1.3) and (1.4) are examples of decoding
rules that return the value represented by a multi-bit digital signal.
Write down the corresponding encoding rules. These rules give the
value of each bit of the digital signal as a function of the value being
encoded.
1.11 Encoding playing cards. Suggest a binary representation for playing
cards – a set of binary signals that uniquely identifies one of the 52
cards in a standard deck. What different representations might be used
to (i) optimize the density (the minimum number of bits per card) or
(ii) simplify operations such as determining whether two cards are of
the same suit or rank? Explain how you can check to see whether two
cards are adjacent (rank differing by one) using a specific
representation.
1.12Day of the week. Explain how to derive the day of the week from the
month/day representation we discussed in Section 1.3.1.
1.13Colors, I. Derive a representation for colors that supports the
operation of additive composition of primary colors. You start with

--- Page 56 ---
black and add colored light that is red, green, or blue.
1.14Colors, II. Extend the representation of Exercise 1.13 to support three
levels of intensity for each of the primary colored lights; that is, each
color can be off, weakly on, medium on, or strongly on.
1.15Encoding and decoding, I. A four-core chip is arranged as a 4 × 1
array of processors, where each processor is connected to its east and
west neighbors. There are no connections on the ends of the array. The
processors’ addresses start at 0 on the east-most processor and go up
by 1 to address 3 at the west-most processor. Given the current
processor’s address and the address of a destination processor, how do
you determine whether to go east or west to reach the destination
processor?
1.16Encoding and decoding, II. A 16-core chip is arranged as a 4 × 4 array
of processors where each processor is connected to its north, south,
east, and west neighbors. There are no connections on the edges. Pick
an encoding for the address of each processor (0–15) such that when a
datum is moving through the processors it is easy (i.e., similar to
Exercise 1.15) to determine whether it should move north, south, east,
or west at each processor on the basis of the destination address and
the address of the current processor.
(a) Draw the array of processors, labeling each core with its address
according to your encoding.
(b) Describe how to determine the direction the data should move on
the basis of current and destination addresses.
(c) How does this encoding or its interpretation differ from simply
labeling the processors 0–15 starting at the north-west corner?
1.17Circular Gray code. Come up with a way of encoding the numbers 0–
5 onto a four-bit binary signal so that adjacent numbers differ in only
one bit and also so that the representations of 0 and 5 differ in only
one bit.
1 The actual specification for Vmax is VDD + 0.3, where VDD, the power supply, is allowed to vary
between 2.3 and 2.7 V.
2 Of course, one is limited by analog input devices in acquiring real-world signals of high precision.
3 This notation for multi-bit signals is discussed in more detail in Section 8.1.
4 The symbol ∨  denotes the logical OR of two binary numbers; see Chapter 3.
5 We leave unanswered for now how the register is initially set with the correct date.
6 Honeywell v. Sperry Rand.

--- Page 57 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 58 ---
2
The practice of digital system design
Before we dive into the technical details of digital system design, it is
useful to take a high-level look at the way systems are designed in
industry today. This will allow us to put the design techniques we learn in
subsequent chapters into the proper context. This chapter examines four
aspects of contemporary digital system design practice: the design
process, implementation technology, computer-aided design tools, and
technology scaling.
We start in Section 2.1 by describing the design process – how a design
starts with a specification and proceeds through the phases of concept
development, feasibility studies, detailed design, and verification. Except
for the last few steps, most of the design work is done using English-
language1 documents. A key aspect of any design process is a systematic –
and usually quantitative – process of managing technical risk.
Digital designs are implemented on very-large-scale integrated (VLSI)
circuits (often called chips) and packaged on printed-circuit boards
(PCBs). Section 2.2 discusses the capabilities of contemporary
implementation technology.
The design of highly complex VLSI chips and boards is made possible
by sophisticated computer-aided design (CAD) tools. These tools,
described in Section 2.3, amplify the capability of the designer by
performing much of the work associated with capturing a design,
synthesizing the logic and physical layout, and verifying that the design is
both functionally correct and meets timing.
Approximately every two years, the number of transistors that can be
economically fabricated on an integrated-circuit chip doubles. We discuss
this growth rate, known as Moore’s law, and its implications for digital
systems design in Section 2.4.

--- Page 59 ---
2.1 THE DESIGN PROCESS
As in other fields of engineering, the digital design process begins with a
specification. The design then proceeds through phases of concept
development, feasibility, partitioning, and detailed design. Most texts, like
this one, deal with only the last two steps of this process. To put the design
and analysis techniques we will learn into perspective, we will briefly
examine the other steps here. Figure 2.1 gives an overview of the design
process.
Figure 2.1. The design process. Initial effort is focused on design specification and risk analysis. Only
after the creation of a product implementation plan does implementation begin. The implementation
process itself has many iterations of verification and optimization. Many products also have multiple
internal hardware revisions before being shipped.
2.1.1Specification

--- Page 60 ---
All designs start with a specification that describes the item to be designed.
Depending on the novelty of the object, developing the specification may be
a straightforward or elaborate process in itself. The vast majority of designs
are evolutionary – the design of a new version of an existing product. For
such evolutionary designs, the specification process is one of determining
how much better (faster, smaller, cheaper, more reliable, etc.) the new
product should be. At the same time, new designs are often constrained by
the previous design. For example, a new processor must usually execute the
same instruction set as the model it is replacing, and a new I/O device must
usually support the same standard I/O interface (e.g., a PCI bus) as the
previous generation.
On rare occasions, the object being specified is the first of its kind. For
such revolutionary developments, the specification process is quite different.
There are no constraints of backward compatibility, although the new object
may need to be compatible with one or more standards. This gives the
designer more freedom, but also less guidance, in determining the function,
features, and performance of the object.
Whether revolutionary or evolutionary, the specification process is an
iterative process – like most engineering processes. We start by writing a
straw man specification for the object – and in doing so we identify a
number of questions or open issues. We then iteratively refine this initial
specification by gathering information to answer the questions or resolve the
open issues. We meet with customers or end users of the product to
determine the features they want, how much they value each feature, and
how they react to our proposed specification. We commission engineering
studies to determine the cost of certain features. Examples of cost metrics
include how much die area it will take to reach a certain level of
performance, or how much power will be dissipated by adding a branch
predictor to a processor. Each time a new piece of information comes in, we
revise our specification to account for the new information. A history of this
revision process is also kept to give a rationale for the decisions made.
While we could continue forever refining our specification, ultimately we
must freeze the specification and start design. The decision to freeze the
specification is usually driven by a combination of schedule pressure (if the
product is too late, it will miss a market window) and resolution of all critical
open issues. Just because the specification is frozen does not mean that it
cannot change. If a critical flaw is found after the design starts, the

--- Page 61 ---
specification must be changed. However, after freezing the specification,
changes are much more difficult in that they must proceed through an
engineering change control process. This is a formal process that makes sure
that any change to the specification is propagated into all documents,
designs, test programs, etc., and that all of the people affected by the change
sign off on it. It also assesses the cost of the change – in terms of both
financial cost and schedule slippage – as part of the decision process
regarding whether to make the change.
The end product of the specification process is an English-language
document that describes the object to be designed. Different companies use
different names for this document. Many companies call it a product
specification or (for chip makers) component specification. A prominent
microprocessor manufacturer calls it a target specification or TSPEC.2 It
describes the object’s function, interfaces, performance, power dissipation,
and cost. In short, it describes what the product does, but not how it does it –
that’s what the design does.
2.1.2Concept development and feasibility
During the concept development phase the high-level design of the system is
performed. Block diagrams are drawn, major subsystems are defined, and
the rough outline of system operation is specified. More importantly, key
engineering decisions are made at this stage. This phase is driven by the
specification. The concept developed must meet the specification, or, if a
requirement is too difficult to meet, the specification must be changed.
In the partitioning, as well as in the specification of each subsystem,
different approaches to the design are developed and evaluated. For
example, to build a large communication switch we could use a large
crossbar, or we could use a multi-stage network. During the concept
development phase, we would evaluate both approaches and select the one
that best meets our needs. Similarly, we may need to develop a processor
that operates at 1.5× the speed of the previous model. During the concept
development phase we would consider increasing the clock rate, using a
more accurate branch predictor, increasing the cache size, and/or increasing
the issue width. We would evaluate the costs and benefits of these
approaches in isolation and in combination.

--- Page 62 ---
Technology selection and vendor qualification is also a part of concept
development. During these processes, we select what components and
processes we are going to use to build our product and determine who is
going to supply them. In a typical digital design project, this involves
selecting suppliers of standard chips (like memory chips and FPGAs),
suppliers of custom chips (either an ASIC vendor or a foundry), suppliers of
packages, suppliers of circuit boards, and suppliers of connectors. Particular
attention is usually paid to components, processes, or suppliers that are new,
since they represent an element of risk. For example, if we consider using a
new optical transceiver or optical switch that has never been built or used
before, we need to evaluate the probability that it may not work, may not
meet specifications, or may not be available when we need it.
A key part of technology selection is making make vs. buy decisions about
different pieces of the design. For example, you may need to choose between
designing your own Ethernet interface and buying the VHDL for the
interface from a vendor. The two (or more) alternatives are evaluated in
terms of cost, schedule, performance, and risk. A decision is then made on
the basis of the merits of each. Often information needs to be gathered (from
design studies, reference checks on vendors, etc.) before making the
decision. Too often, engineers favor building things themselves when it is
often much cheaper and faster to buy a working design from a vendor. On
the other hand, “caveat emptor”3 applies to digital design. Just because
someone is selling a product does not mean that it works or meets
specification. You may find that the Ethernet interface you purchased does
not work on certain packet lengths. Each piece of technology acquired from
an outside supplier represents a risk and needs to be carefully verified before
it is used. This verification can often take up a large fraction of the effort that
would have been required to do the design yourself.
A large part of engineering is the art of managing technical risk – of
setting the level of ambition high enough to give a winning product, but not
so high that the product can’t be built in time. A good designer takes a few
calculated risks in selected areas that give big returns, and manages them
carefully. Being too conservative (taking no risks, or too few risks) usually
results in a non-competitive product. On the other hand, being too aggressive
(taking too many risks – particularly in areas that give little return) results in
a product that is too late to be relevant. Far more products fail for being too

--- Page 63 ---
aggressive (often in areas that do not matter) than fail on account of being
too conservative.
To manage technical risks effectively, risks must be identified, evaluated,
and mitigated. Identifying risks calls attention to them so they can be
monitored. Once we have identified a risk, we evaluate it along two axes –
importance and danger. For importance, we ask “what do we gain by taking
this risk?” If it doubles our system performance or halves its power
requirement, it might be worth taking. However, if the gain (compared with
a more conservative alternative) is negligible, there is no point taking the
risk. For danger, we quantify or classify risks according to how likely they
are to succeed. One approach is to assign two numbers between 1 and 5 to
each risk, one for importance and one for danger. Risks that are (1,5) – low
importance and high danger – are abandoned. Risks that are (5,1) – nearly
sure bets with big returns – are kept and managed. Risks that rank (5,5) –
very important and very dangerous – are the trickiest. We can’t afford to take
too many risks, so some of these have to go. Our approach is to reduce the
danger of these risks through mitigation: turning a (5,5) into a (5,4) and
eventually into a (5,1).
Many designers manage risks informally – mentally following a process
similar to the one described here and then making instinctive decisions as to
which risks to take and which to avoid. This is a bad design practice for
several reasons. It does not work with a large design team (written
documents are needed for communication) or for large designs (there are too
many risks to keep in one head). Designers often make poor and uninformed
decisions when using an informal, non-quantitative risk management
scheme. These schemes also leave no written rationale behind risk
management decisions.
We often mitigate risks by gathering information. For example, suppose
our new processor design calls for a single pipeline stage to check
dependences, rename registers, and issue instructions to eight ALUs (a
complex logical function). We have identified this as both important (it buys
us lots of performance) and dangerous (we are not sure it can be done at our
target clock frequency). We can reduce the danger to level 1 by carrying out
the design early and establishing that it can be done. This is often called a
feasibility study, establishing that a proposed design approach is, in fact,
feasible. We can often establish feasibility (to a high degree of probability)
with much less effort than completing a detailed design.

--- Page 64 ---
Risks can also be mitigated by developing a backup plan. For example,
suppose that one of the (5,5) risks in our conceptual design is the use of a
new SRAM part made by a small manufacturer, which is not going to be
available until just before we need it. We can reduce this risk by finding an
alternative component, with better availability but worse performance, and
designing our system so it can use either part. If the high-risk part is not
available in time, rather than not having a system at all, we have a system
that has just a little less performance, and can be upgraded when the new
component is out.
Risks cannot be mitigated by ignoring them and hoping that they go away.
This is called denial, and is a sure-fire way to make a project fail.
With a formal risk management process, identified risks are typically
reviewed on a periodic basis (e.g., once every week or two). At each review
the importance and danger of the risk are updated on the basis of new
information. This review process makes risk mitigation visible to the
engineering team. Risks that are successfully being mitigated, whether
through information gathering or backup plans, will have their danger drop
steadily over time. Risks that are not being properly managed will have their
danger level remain high – drawing attention to them so that they can be
more successfully managed.
The result of the concept development phase is a second English-language
document that describes in detail how the object is to be designed. It
describes the key aspects of the design approach taken, giving a rationale for
each. It identifies all of the outside players: chip suppliers, package
suppliers, connector suppliers, circuit-board supplier, CAD tool providers,
design service providers, etc. This document also identifies all risks and
gives a rationale for why they are worth taking, and describes completed and
ongoing actions to mitigate them. Different companies use different names
for this how document. It has been called an implementation specification
and a product implementation plan.
2.1.3Partitioning and detailed design
Once the concept phase is complete and design decisions have been made,
what remains is to partition the design into modules and then perform the
detailed design of each module. The high-level system partitioning is usually
done as part of the conceptual design process. A specification is written for

--- Page 65 ---
each of these high-level modules, with particular attention to interfaces.
These specifications enable the modules to be designed independently and, if
they all conform to the specification, work when plugged together during
system integration.
In a complex system the top-level modules will themselves be partitioned
into submodules, and so on. The partitioning of modules into submodules is
often referred to as block-level design since it is carried out by drawing
block diagrams of the system, where each block represents a module or
submodule and the lines between the modules represent the interfaces over
which the modules interact.
Ultimately, we subdivide a module to the level where each of its
submodules can be directly realized using a synthesis procedure. These
bottom-level modules may be combinational logic blocks to compute a
logical function on its inputs, arithmetic modules to manipulate numbers,
and finite-state machines that sequence the operation of the system. Much of
this book focuses on the design and analysis of these bottom-level modules.
It is important to maintain perspective of where they fit in a larger system.
2.1.4Verification
In a typical design project, more than half of the effort goes not into design,
but into verifying that the design is correct. Verification takes place at all
levels: from the conceptual design down to individual modules. At the
highest level, architectural verification is performed on the conceptual
design. In this process, the conceptual design is checked against the
specification to ensure that every requirement of the specification is satisfied
by the implementation.
Unit tests are written to verify the functionality of each individual module.
Typically, there are far more lines of test code than there are lines of VHDL
implementing the modules. After the individual modules have been verified,
they are integrated into the enclosing subsystem and the process is repeated
at the next level of the module hierarchy. Ultimately the entire system is
integrated, and a complete suite of tests is run to validate that the system
implements all aspects of the specification.
The verification effort is usually performed according to yet another
written document, called a test plan.4 In the test plan, every feature of the
device under test (DUT) is identified, and tests are specified to cover all of

--- Page 66 ---
the identified features. A large fraction of tests will deal with error
conditions (how the system responds to inputs that are outside its normal
operating modes) and boundary cases (inputs that are just inside or just
outside the normal operating mode).
A large subset of all tests will typically be grouped into a regression test
suite and run on the design periodically (often every night) and any time a
change is checked in to the revision control system. The purpose of the
regression suite is to make sure that the design does not regress – i.e., to
make sure that, in fixing one bug, a designer has not caused other tests to
fail.
When time and resources are short, engineers are sometimes tempted to
take shortcuts and skip some verification. This is hardly ever a good idea. A
healthy philosophy toward verification is the following: If it hasn’t been
tested, it doesn’t work. Every feature, mode, and boundary condition needs
to be tested. In the long run, the design will get into production more quickly
if you complete each step of the verification and resist the temptation to take
shortcuts.
Bugs occur in all designs, even those by top engineers. The earlier a bug
can be detected, the less time and money it takes to fix. A rule of thumb is
that the cost of fixing a bug increases by a factor of ten each time the design
proceeds forward by one major step. Bugs are cheapest to fix if they are
detected during unit test. A bug that slips through unit test and is caught
during integration test costs 10× more to fix.5 One that makes it through
integration test and is caught at full system test costs 10× more again (100×
more than fixing the bug at unit test). If the bug makes it through system test
and is not caught until silicon debug, after the chip has been taped out and
fabricated, it costs 10× more again. A bug that is not caught until the chip is
in production (and must be recalled) costs another 10× – 10 000× more than
fixing the bug in unit test. You get the point – do not skimp on testing. The
earlier you find a bug, the easier it is to fix.
2.2 DIGITAL SYSTEMS ARE BUILT FROM
CHIPS AND BOARDS

--- Page 67 ---
Modern digital systems are implemented using a combination of standard
integrated circuits and custom integrated circuits interconnected by circuit
boards that, in turn, are interconnected by connectors and cables.
Standard integrated circuits are parts that can be ordered from a catalog
and include memories of all types (SRAM, DRAM, ROM, EPROM,
EEPROM, etc.), programmable logic (FPGAs, see below), microprocessors,
and standard peripheral interfaces. Designers make every effort possible to
use a standard integrated circuit to realize a function; since these
components can simply be purchased, there is no development cost or effort
and usually little risk associated with these parts. However, in some cases, a
performance, power, or cost specification cannot be realized using a standard
component, and a custom integrated circuit must be designed.
Custom integrated circuits (sometimes called ASICs, for application-
specific integrated circuits) are chips built for a specific function. Or, put
differently, they are chips you design yourself because you can’t find what
you need in a catalog. Most ASICs are built using a standard-cell design
method in which standard modules (cells) are selected from a library and
instantiated and interconnected on a silicon chip. Typical standard cells
include simple gate circuits, SRAM and ROM memories, and I/O circuits.
Some vendors also offer higher-level modules such as arithmetic units,
microprocessors, and standard peripherals – either as cells, or written in
synthesizable HDL (e.g., VHDL). Thus, designing an ASIC from standard
cells is similar to designing a circuit board from standard parts. In both
cases, the designer (or CAD tool) selects cells from a catalog and specifies
how they are connected. Using standard cells to build an ASIC has the same
advantages as using standard parts on a board: reduced development cost
and reduced risk. In rare cases, a designer will design their own non-standard
cell at the transistor level. Such custom cells can provide significant
performance, area, and power advantages over standard-cell logic, but
should be used sparingly because they involve significant design effort and
are major risk items.
As an example of a custom integrated circuit, Figure 2.2 shows an
NVIDIA “Fermi” GPU [88, 114]. This chip is fabricated in 40 nm CMOS
technology and has over 3 × 109 transistors. It consists of 16 streaming
multiprocessors (in four rows at the top and bottom of the die) with 32
CUDA cores each, for a total of 512 cores. Each core contains an integer unit
and a double-precision floating-point unit. A crossbar switch (see Section

--- Page 68 ---
24.3) can be seen in the center of the die. Connections to six 64-bit partitions
(384 bits total) of GDDR5 DRAM (see Section 25.1.2) consume most of the
periphery of the chip.
Figure 2.2. Die photo of an NVIDIA Fermi GPU. This chip is fabricated in 40 nm CMOS technology
and contains over three billion transistors.
Field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are an intermediate point
between standard parts and ASICs. They are standard parts that can be
programmed to realize an arbitrary function. Although they are significantly
less efficient than ASICs, they are ideally suited to realizing custom logic in
less demanding, low-volume applications. Large FPGAs, like the Xilinx

--- Page 69 ---
Virtex 7, contain up to two million logic cells, over 10 MB of SRAM,
several microprocessors, and hundreds of arithmetic building blocks. The
programmable logic is significantly (over an order of magnitude) less dense,
less energy-efficient, and slower than fixed standard-cell logic. This makes it
prohibitively costly in high-volume applications. However, in low-volume
applications, the high per-unit cost of an FPGA is attractive compared with
the tooling costs for an ASIC. Manufacturing a 28 nm ASIC can cost up to
$3 million, not including design costs. The total non-recurring cost6 of an
ASIC is about $20 million to $40 million.
To give you an idea what will fit on a typical ASIC, Table 2.1 lists the area
of a number of typical digital building blocks in units of grids (χ2). A grid is
the area between the centerlines of adjacent minimum spaced wires in the x-
and y-directions. In a contemporary 28 nm process, the minimum wire pitch
is χ = 90 nm and one grid is of area χ2 = 8100 nm2. In such a process, there
are 1.2 × 108 grids/mm2 and 1.2 × 109 grids on a relatively small 10 mm2 die
– enough room for 30 million NAND gates. A simple 32-bit RISC processor,
which used to fill a chip in the mid 1980s, now fits into less than 0.01 mm2.
As described in Section 2.4, the number of grids per chip doubles every 18
months, so the number of components that can be packed on a chip is
constantly increasing.
Table 2.1. Area of integrated circuit components in grids
Module Area (grids)
One bit of DRAM 2
One bit of ROM 2
One bit of SRAM 24
Two-input NAND gate 40
Static latch 100
Flip-flop 300
One bit of a ripple-carry adder 500
32-bit carry-look-ahead adder 30 000
32-bit multiplier 300 000
32-bit RISC microprocessor (w/o caches) 500 000

--- Page 70 ---
EXAMPLE 2.1 Estimating chip area
Estimate the total amount of chip area occupied by an eight-tap FIR filter. All inputs are 32 bits wide
(ii), and the filter stores eight 32-bit weights (wi) in flip-flops. The output (X) is calculated as follows:
The area for storing the weights, the multipliers, and the adders can be computed as follows:
Aw = 8 × 32 × Aff = 7.68 × 104 grids,
Am = 8 × Amul = 2.4 × 106 grids,
Aa = 7 × Aadd = 2.1 × 105 grids.
We need only seven adders since we use a tree structure to do a pairwise reduction of addends (see
Section 12.3). To get the total area in 28 nm technology, we sum the area of each of the components;
the area is dominated by the multipliers:
AFIR = Aw + Am + Aa = 2.69 × 106 grids = 0.022 mm2.
Unfortunately, chip I/O bandwidth does not increase as fast as the number
of grids per chip. Modern chips are limited to about 1000 signal pins by a
number of factors, and such high pin counts come at a significant cost. One
of the major factors limiting pin count and driving cost is the achievable
density of printed-circuit boards. Routing all of the signals from a high-pin-
count integrated circuit out from under the chip’s package, the escape
pattern, stresses the density of a printed-circuit board and often requires
additional layers (and hence cost).
Modern circuit boards are laminated from copper-clad glass–epoxy boards
interleaved with pre-preg glass–epoxy sheets.7 The copper-clad boards are
patterned using photolithography to define wires and are then laminated
together. Connections between layers are made by drilling the boards and
electroplating the holes. Boards can be made with a large number of layers –
20 or more is not unusual, but is costly. More economical boards have ten or
fewer layers. Layers typically alternate between an x signal layer (carrying
signals in the x-direction), a y signal layer, and a power plane. The power
planes distribute power supplies to the chips, isolate the signal layers from
one another, and provide a return path for the transmission lines of the signal
layers. The signal layers can be defined with minimum wire width and
spacing of 3 mils (0.003 inches, about 75 μm). Less expensive boards use 5
mil width and spacing rules.

--- Page 71 ---
Holes to connect between layers are the primary factor limiting board
density. Because of electroplating limits, the holes must have an aspect ratio
(ratio of the board thickness to the hole diameter) no greater than 10:1. A
board with a thickness of 0.1 inch requires a minimum hole diameter of 0.01
inch. The minimum hole-to-hole centerline spacing is 25 mils (40 holes per
inch). Consider, for example, the escape pattern under a chip in a 1 mm ball-
grid-array (BGA) package. With 5 mil lines and spacing, there is room to
escape just one signal conductor between the through holes (with 3 mil
width and spacing, two conductors fit between holes), requiring a different
signal layer for each row of signal balls after the first around the periphery of
the chip.
Figure 2.3 shows a board from a Cray XT6 supercomputer. The board
measures 22.58×14.44 inches and contains a number of integrated circuits
and modules. On the left side of the board are two Gemini router chips –
Cray ASICs that form a system-wide interconnection network (see Section
24.4). All that you see of the Gemini chips (and most of the other chips) is
the metal heat sinks that draw heat out of the chips into the forced-air
cooling. Next to the Gemini chips are 16 DRAM DIMM modules that
provide the main memory for the supercomputer node. Next in line are four
AMD Opteron eight-core CPU chips. On the right side of the board, under
large copper heat sinks, are four NVIDIA Fermi C2090X GPU modules.
Each of these modules is itself a small printed-circuit board that contains a
Fermi GPU chip (shown in Figure 2.2), 24 GDDR5 DRAM chips, and
voltage regulators for the GPU and memories.

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 2.3. A node board from a Cray XT6 supercomputer. The board contains (left to right) two
router chips, 16 DRAM DIMM modules, four AMD Opteron eight-core CPUs, and four NVIDIA
Fermi GPU modules (see Figure 2.2). All that is visible of most of the chips and modules is their heat
sinks.
Connectors carry signals from one board to another. Right-angle
connectors connect cards to a backplane or midplane that carries signals
between the cards. The Cray module of Figure 2.3 has such a connector at its
far left side. This connector inserts into a backplane that is itself a printed-
circuit board. The backplane contains signal layers that provide connections
between modules in the backplane. The backplane also houses cable
connectors that connect the modules via electrical or optical cables to
modules on other backplanes.
Co-planar connectors connect daughter cards to a mother card. The four
NVIDIA GPU modules at the right side of Figure 2.3 are connected to the
Cray module via such co-planar connectors.
Packaging of electronic systems is described in more detail in ref. [33].

--- Page 73 ---
2.3 COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN TOOLS
The modern digital designer is assisted by a number of computer-aided
design (CAD) tools. CAD tools are computer programs that help manage
one or more aspects of the design process. They fall into three major
categories: capture, synthesis, and verification. CAD tools exist for doing
logical, electrical, and physical design. We show an example design flow in
Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4. A typical CAD toolflow. The HDL design is first captured and verified. Engineers then
floorplan and synthesize the design into logic gates, which are then placed and routed. Final tests on
the design include timing analysis, final verification of the placed and routed netlist, and final physical
design checks. Not pictured are the back-edges from all boxes to HDL design as the implementation is
constantly refined and optimized.
As the name implies, capture tools help capture the design. The most
common capture tool is a schematic editor. A designer uses the tool to enter

--- Page 74 ---
the design as a hierarchical drawing showing the connections between all
modules and submodules. For many designs a textual hardware description
language (HDL) such as VHDL is used instead of a schematic, and a text
editor is used to capture the design. Textual design capture is, with few
exceptions, far more productive than schematic capture.
Once a design has been captured, verification tools are used to ensure that
it is correct. Before a design can be shipped, it must be functionally correct,
meet timing constraints, and have no electrical rule violations. A simulator is
used to test the functionality of a schematic or HDL design. Test scripts are
written to drive the inputs and observe the outputs of the design, and an error
is flagged if the outputs are not as expected. Simulators, however, are only
as good as their test cases. Without a test that exposes an error, it won’t be
found by a simulator. Formal verification tools use mathematical proof
techniques to prove that a design meets a specification independently of test
vectors. A static timing analyzer verifies that a design meets its timing
constraints (also independently of test cases). We detail verification further
in Chapter 20.
A synthesis tool reduces a design from one level of abstraction to a lower
level of abstraction. For example, a logic synthesis tool takes a high-level
description of a design in an HDL like VHDL, and reduces it to a gate-level
netlist. Logic synthesis tools have largely eliminated manual combinational
logic design, making designers significantly more productive. A place-and-
route tool takes a gate-level netlist and reduces it to a physical design by
placing the individual gates and routing the wires between them.
In modern ASICs and FPGAs, a large fraction of the delay and power is
due to the wires interconnecting gates and other cells, rather than to the gates
or cells themselves. Achieving high performance (and low power) requires
managing the placement process to ensure that critical signals travel only
short distances. Keeping signals short is best achieved by manually
partitioning a design into modules of no more than 50 000 gates (two million
grids), constructing a floorplan that indicates where each of these modules is
to be placed, and placing each module separately into its region of the
floorplan.
CAD tools are also used to generate manufacturing tests for integrated
circuits. These tests prove that a particular chip coming off the
manufacturing line works correctly. By scanning test patterns into the flip-
flops of a chip (which are configured as a big shift register for the purpose),

--- Page 75 ---
every transistor and wire of a complex, modern integrated circuit can be
verified with a relatively small number of test patterns.
CAD tools, however, often limit a large design space into a much smaller
set of designs that can be easily made with a particular set of tools.
Techniques that could greatly improve the efficiency of a design are often
disallowed, not because they are themselves risky, but rather because they do
not work with a particular synthesis flow or verification procedure. This is
unfortunate; CAD tools are supposed to make the designer’s job easier, not
limit the scope of what they can design.
2.4 MOORE’S LAW AND DIGITAL SYSTEM
EVOLUTION
In 1965, Gordon Moore predicted that the number of transistors on an
integrated circuit would double every year. This prediction, that circuit
density increases exponentially, has held for 40 years so far, and has come to
be known as Moore’s law. Over time, the doubling every year has been
revised to doubling every 18–20 months, but, even so, the rate of increase is
very rapid. The number of components (or grids) on an integrated circuit is
increasing with a compound annual growth rate of over 50%, growing by
nearly an order of magnitude roughly every five years. This is plotted in
Figure 2.5.

--- Page 76 ---
Figure 2.5. The number of transistors on commercial processors over several decades, illustrating
Moore’s law.
For many years (from the 1960s until about 2005), voltage scaled linearly
with gate length. With this constant-field or Dennard scaling [37], as the
number of devices increased, the devices also got faster and dissipated less
energy. To a first approximation, when the linear dimension L of a
semiconductor technology is halved, the area required by a device, which
scales as L2, is quartered, hence we can get four times as many devices in the
same area. With constant-field scaling, the delay of the device was also
proportional to L, and hence was also halved – so each of these devices runs
twice as fast. The energy consumed by switching a single device Esw = CV2
scaled as L3, since both C and V were proportional to L. Thus, back in the
good old days of constant-field scaling, each time L was halved, our circuits
could do eight times as much work (four times the number of devices
running twice as fast) for the same power.
Unfortunately, the linear scaling of both device speed and supply voltage
ended in 2005. Since then, supply voltages have remained roughly constant
at about 1 V while L continues to reduce. In this new regime of constant-

--- Page 77 ---
voltage scaling, each time L is halved we still get four times as many devices
per unit area. However, now they run only slightly faster (about 25% faster),
and, most importantly, Esw decreases only linearly, because V remains
constant. Thus, in this new era, when we halve L we can do about five times
as much work per unit area (four times as many devices running 1.25×
faster) for 2.5× the power. It is easy to see that, in the regime of constant-
voltage scaling, chips quickly get to the point where they are limited not by
the number of devices that can integrated on the chip, but rather by power.
Moore’s law makes the world an interesting place for a digital system
designer. Each time the density of integrated circuits increases by an order of
magnitude or two (every five to ten years), there is a qualitative change both
in the type of systems being designed and in the methods used to design
them. In contrast, most engineering disciplines are relatively stable – with
slow, incremental improvements. You don’t see cars getting a factor of eight
more energy efficient every three years. Each time such a qualitative change
occurs, a generation of designers gets a clean sheet of paper to work on,
because much of the previous wisdom about how best to build a system is no
longer valid. Fortunately, the basic principles of digital design remain
invariant as technology scales; however, design practices change
considerably with each technology generation.
The rapid pace of change in digital design means that digital designers
must be students throughout their professional careers, constantly learning to
keep pace with new technologies, techniques, and design methods. This
continuing education typically involves reading the trade press (EE Times is
a good place to start), keeping up with new-product announcements from
fabrication houses, chip vendors, and CAD tool vendors, and occasionally
taking a formal course to learn a new set of skills or update an old set.
EXAMPLE 2.2 Moore’s law
Estimate how many FIR filters of Example 2.1 will, in 2017, fit into an area of a single filter
implemented in a 2012 28 nm process.
We raise the annual growth rate (1.5) to the number of years (five), giving the following increase in
FIR filter density:
N = 1.52017−2012 = 7.6.
Summary

--- Page 78 ---
In this chapter you have had a very brief glimpse at how digital design is
practiced in industry. We started by describing the design process, which
proceeds from specification, through concept development, to detailed
design and verification. Digital systems are designed in English-language
documents – specifications and implementation plans – before they are
captured in VHDL. A large part of the design process is managing risk. By
quantifying risk and developing techniques to mitigate risk (e.g., backup
plans), one can get the benefits of being technically aggressive without
putting the overall project in jeopardy. Verification is a large part of the
development process. The best rule of verification is that if it hasn’t been
tested, it doesn’t work. The cost of fixing a bug increases by an order of
magnitude at each stage of the design.
Modern digital systems are implemented with integrated circuits (chips)
and printed-circuit boards. We presented a simple model for estimating the
chip area required by a particular digital logic function and looked at an
example chip and board.
Modern digital design practice makes heavy use of, and is constrained by,
computer-aided design (CAD) tools. These tools are used for design capture,
simulation, synthesis, and verification. Tools operate both at the logical level
– manipulating VHDL designs and gate-level netlists – and at the physical
level – manipulating the geometry of layers on integrated circuits.
The number of transistors that can be economically implemented on an
integrated circuit increases exponentially with time – doubling every 18
months. This phenomenon, known as Moore’s law, makes digital design a
very dynamic field, since this rapidly evolving technology constantly
presents new design challenges and makes possible new products that were
not previously feasible.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Moore’s original article in Electronics [84] not only predicts that the number
of devices increases exponentially over time, but also explains why, with
constant-field scaling, this results in constant chip power. Brunvand [21]
gives an overview of the modern design process from hardware description
language to manufacturing, showing how to use state-of-the-art CAD tools
and providing many examples. Two books that discuss the engineering
process as a whole are Brooks’s The Mythical Man-Month [19] and Kidder’s

--- Page 79 ---
The Soul of a New Machine [64]. Brooks’s text provides several essays about
software engineering, though many of its lessons also apply to hardware
engineering. Kidder’s book recounts the building of a minicomputer over the
course of a year. Both are worth reading.
Exercises
2.1 Specification, I. You have decided to build an economical (cheap)
video game system. Provide a specification of your design. Include
components, inputs and outputs, and device media.
2.2 Specification, II. Congratulations, your video game console from
Exercise 2.1 has become a great success! Provide a specification for
version 2 of the console. Focus specifically on the changes from
version 1, such as whether you will support backwards compatibility.
2.3 Specification, III. Give a specification for a traffic-light system to be
placed at a busy intersection. Points to consider include how many
lights, turn lanes, pedestrians, and light duration. You can assume that
traffic is equally heavy in all directions.
2.4 Buying vs. building, I. Provide a buy vs. build decision and rationale
for three of the components from the video game system of Exercise
2.1. Include at least one “buy” item and one “build” item.
2.5 Buying vs. building, II. If tasked with creating an air-bag deployment
system for cars, what components will you need? What will you buy
off the shelf and what will you design? Why? At minimum, you will
need accelerometers, an actuator, and a centralized controller.
2.6 Buy vs. building, III. As part of your design, you have been tasked with
purchasing a USB controller. Find a vendor (online) that sells USB
controllers and download two different data sheets and pricings. What
are the key differences?
2.7 Risk management. You are in charge of building the next-generation
electronic car. Assign (and explain) a reward, risk ordered pair (on a
scale of 1–5) to each of the following.
(a) Using an experimental new battery that can hold 5× the energy of
your current batteries.
(b) Installing seat belts.
(c) Adding a cup holder.

--- Page 80 ---
(d) Installing sensors and a control system to alert the driver of cars in
their blind spot.
(e) Adding a full satellite and navigation system. What are the risks?
(f) For your car, give another example of a (1,5) feature.
(g) For your car, give another example of a (5,5) feature.
2.8 Feasibility and mitigation. Design a feasibility study or a way of
mitigating the risk for each of the following high-risk tasks:
(a) verifying a critical component with a new verification
methodology;
(b) adding a new instruction to your next-generation processor;
(c) putting 16 cores onto a chip for a next-generation processor;
(d) porting your design from a 0.13 μm process to 28nm;
(e) your answer to Exercise 2.7(g).
2.9 Chip area, I. Estimate how much area you will need, using Table 2.1,
to implement a module that outputs the average of the last four 32-bit
input values. You will need flip-flops to store the last three inputs.
What about the weighted average with 32-bit arbitrary weights in
ROM? How much area does it cost to store the weights in SRAM?
2.10Chip area, II. A basic matrix multiply operation of two n × n matrices
requires 3n2 units of storage and n3 fused multiplication-additions. For
this problem, assume that each element of a matrix is 32 bits and use
the component sizes of Table 2.1. Assume that doing a fused multiply-
add takes a combined 5 ns; that is, each 5 ns, one of the n3 operations
completes. The functional unit has an area equal to the sum of a 32-bit
multiplier and a 32-bit adder.
(a) How much SRAM area is required to do an n = 500 matrix
multiply? Give your answer in both grids and mm2 for a 28 nm
process.
(b) How long will the matrix multiply take if you have just one fused
multiplier-adder?
(c) Assume you have an area budget of 10 mm2. If you fill all the die
area that is not SRAM with multiply-adders, how long does the
operation take? Assume that each functional unit performs one
multiply-add operation every 5 ns.

--- Page 81 ---
2.11 Chip area, III. Using the assumptions from Exercise 2.10, what is the
largest matrix multiplication you can do in under 1 ms? Feel free to
modify the proportion of die area devoted to storage and computation.
2.12Chip area, IV. Using the assumptions from Exercise 2.10, what is the
largest matrix multiplication you can do in under 1 μs?
2.13Chips and boards. Find an image of a computer motherboard online or
examine your own computer. Identify and explain the functions of at
least three different chips found on the motherboard. You are not
allowed to select the CPU, graphics processor, or DRAM as one of
your chips.
2.14BGA escape pattern. Sketch the escape pattern of 32 wires (eight on
each side) from a chip to a connector at a different part of a board.
Assume all wires must be routed on the surface of the board and cannot
cross over each other.
2.15CAD tools, I. Pick two functions from Figure 2.4, and find and describe
three different computer programs that perform each function. Are any
of them free? To get you started, leading design vendors include
Synopsys and Cadence.
2.16CAD tools, II. Why is the final verification stage needed at the end of
Figure 2.4?
2.17Moore’s law, I. In 2015, a 133 mm2 chip could have 1.9 billion
transistors. Using Moore’s law, how many transistors will be on a chip
in (a) 2020 and (b) 2025?
2.18Moore’s law, II. In 2015, some manufacturers introduced 14 nm
processors. If we assume that gate lengths scale with the square root of
the number of transistors as given by Moore’s law, in what year will
gate lengths be five silicon atoms across?
2.19Moore’s law, III. Table 2.1 shows the area of a RISC processor and
SRAM in grids. In a 28 nm process there are about 1.2 × 108 grids
mm2. How many RISC processors with 64 K Bytes (or 64 KB) of
SRAM each will fit on a 20 mm × 20 mm chip in a 2011 28 nm
process? How many will fit on a chip in 2020?
1 Or some other natural (human) language.
2 Often the product specification is accompanied by a business plan for the new product that includes
sales forecasts and computes the return on investment for the new product development. However,
that is a separate document.
3 Let the buyer beware.

--- Page 82 ---
4 As you can see, most engineers spend more time writing English-language documents than writing
VHDL or C code.
5 There may be one or more subsystem test levels, each of which multiplies the cost by ten.
6 The cost that is paid once, regardless of the number of chips manufactured.
7 A fiberglass cloth that is impregnated with an epoxy resin that has not been cured.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 83 ---
Part II
Combinational logic
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 84 ---
3
Boolean algebra
We use Boolean algebra to describe the logic functions from which we
build digital systems. Boolean algebra is an algebra over two elements, 0
and 1, with three operators: AND, which we denote as ∧ , OR, which we
denote as ∨ , and NOT, which we denote with a prime or overbar, e.g.,
NOT(x) is x′ or x. These operators have their natural meanings: a ∧  b is 1
only if both a and b are 1, a ∨  b is 1 if either a or b is 1, and ā is true only
if a is 0.
We write logical expressions using these operators and binary variables.
For example, a ∧  b is a logic expression that is true when binary variable
a is true and binary variable b is false. An instantiation of a binary
variable or its complement in an expression is called a literal. For
example, the expression above has two literals, a and b. Boolean algebra
gives us a set of rules for manipulating such expressions so we can
simplify them, put them in normal form, and check two expressions for
equivalence.
We use the ∧  and ∨  notation for AND and OR to make it clear that
Boolean AND and OR are not multiplication and addition over the real
numbers. Many sources, including many textbooks, unfortunately use × or
· to denote AND and + to denote OR. We avoid this practice because it
can lead students to simplify Boolean expressions as if they were
conventional algebraic expressions, that is expressions in the algebra of +
and × over the integers or real numbers. This can lead to confusion since
the properties of Boolean algebra, while similar to conventional algebra,
differ in some crucial ways.1 In particular, Boolean algebra has the
property of duality – which we shall discuss below – while conventional
algebra does not. One manifestation of this is that in Boolean algebra a ∨

--- Page 85 ---
(b ∧  c) = (a ∨  b) ∧  (a ∨  c), whereas in conventional algebra a + (b × c) ≠
(a + b) × (a + c).
We will use Boolean algebra in our study of CMOS logic circuits
(Chapter 4) and combinational logic design (Chapter 6).
3.1 AXIOMS
All of Boolean algebra can be derived from the definitions of the AND, OR,
and NOT functions. These are most easily described as truth tables, shown in
Tables 3.1 and 3.2. Mathematicians like to express these definitions in the
form of axioms, a set of mathematical statements that we assert to be true.
All of Boolean algebra derives from the following axioms:
(3.1)
(3.2)
(3.3)
Table 3.1. Truth tables for AND and OR operations
a b a∧  b a∨  b
0 0 0 0
0 1 0 1
1 0 0 1
1 1 1 1
Table 3.2. Truth table for NOT operation
a ā
0 1
1 0
The duality of Boolean algebra is evident in these axioms. The principle
of duality states that if a Boolean equation is true, then replacing the
expressions on both sides with one where (a) all ∨ s are replaced by ∧ s and

--- Page 86 ---
vice versa and (b) all 0s are replaced by 1s and vice versa also gives an
equation that is true. Since this duality holds in the axioms, and all of
Boolean algebra is derived from these axioms, duality holds for all of
Boolean algebra.
3.2 PROPERTIES
From our axioms we can derive a number of useful properties about Boolean
expressions:
commutative x ∧  y = y ∧  x, x ∨  y = y ∨  x;
associative x ∧  (y ∧  z) = (x ∧  y) ∧  z, x ∨  (y ∨  z) = (x ∨
y) ∨  z;
distributive x ∧  (y ∨  z) = (x ∧  y) ∨  (x ∧  z), x ∨  (y ∧  z) = (x ∨
y) ∧  (x ∨  z);
idempotence x ∧  x = x, x ∨  x = x;
complementation x ∧x = 0, x ∨x = 1;
absorption x ∧  (x ∨  y) = x, x ∨  (x ∧  y) = x;
combining (x ∧  y) ∨  (x ∧ȳ) = x, (x ∨  y) ∧  (x ∨ȳ) =
x;
DeMorgan’s (x ∧  y) = x ∨  ȳ, (x ∨  y) = x ∧  ȳ;
consensus (x ∧  y) ∨  (x ∧  z) ∨  (y ∧  z) = (x
∧  y) ∨  (x ∧  z),
(x ∨  y) ∧  (x ∨  z) ∧  (y ∨  z) = (x
∨  y) ∧  (x ∨  z).

--- Page 87 ---
These properties can all be proved by checking their validity for all four
possible combinations of x and y or for all eight possible combinations of x,
y, and z. For example, we can prove De Morgan’s theorem as shown in Table
3.3. Mathematicians call this proof technique perfect induction.
Table 3.3. Proof of De Morgan’s theorem by perfect induction
x y (x ∧  y) x ∨ȳ
0 0 1 1
0 1 1 1
1 0 1 1
1 1 0 0
This list of properties is by no means exhaustive. We can write down other
logic equations that are always true. This set is chosen because it has proven
to be useful in simplifying logic equations.
The commutative and associative properties are identical to the properties
you are already familiar with from conventional algebra. We can reorder the
arguments of an AND or OR operation, and an AND or OR with more than
two inputs can be grouped in an arbitrary manner. For example, we can
rewrite a ∧  b ∧  c ∧  d as (a ∧  b) ∧  (c ∧  d) or (d ∧  (c ∧  (b ∧  a))).
Depending on delay constraints and the library of available logic circuits,
there are times when we would use both forms.
The distributive property is also similar to the corresponding property
from conventional algebra. It differs, however, in that it applies both ways.
We can distribute OR over AND as well as AND over OR. In conventional
algebra we cannot distribute + over ×.
The next four properties (idempotence, complementation, absorption, and
combining) have no equivalent in conventional algebra. These properties are
very useful in simplifying equations. For example, consider the following
logic function:
f(a, b, c) = (a ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (ā ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c). (3.4)
First, we apply idempotence twice to triplicate the second term and apply the
commutative property to regroup the terms:

--- Page 88 ---
f(a, b, c) = (a ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (ā ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c)
∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c). (3.5)
Now we can apply the absorption property to the first two terms2 and the
combining property twice (to terms 3 and 4 and to terms 5 and 6), giving
f(a, b, c) = (a ∧  c) ∨  (b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b). (3.6)
In this simplified form it is easy to see that this is the famous majority
function that is true whenever two or three of its input variables are true.
EXAMPLE 3.1 Proof of combining property
Prove, using perfect induction, the combining property of Boolean expressions.
We show the proof by enumerating all possible inputs and calculating the output of each function,
as shown in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4. Proof of combining property using perfect induction
x y (x ∧  y) ∨  (x ∧  ȳ) x (x ∨  y) ∧  (x ∨ȳ) x
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 0 0 0 0
1 0 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1
EXAMPLE 3.2 Function simplification
Simplify, using the properties listed previously, the Boolean expression f(x, y) = (x ∧  (y ∨  x)) ∨  (x ∨
ȳ).
The solution is as follows:


--- Page 89 ---
3.3 DUAL FUNCTIONS
The dual of a logic function, f, is the function f D derived from f by
substituting a ∧  for each ∨ , a ∨  for each ∧ , a 1 for each 0, and a 0 for each
1.
For example, if
f(a, b) = (a ∧  b) ∨  (b ∧  c), (3.7)
then
f D(a, b) = (a ∨  b) ∧  (b ∨  c). (3.8)
A very useful property of duals is that the dual of a function applied to the
complement of the input variables equals the complement of the function.
That is,
f D(ā, b, ...) = f(a, b, ...). (3.9)
This is a generalized form of De Morgan’s theorem, which states the same
result for simple AND and OR functions. We will use this property in
Section 4.3 to use dual switch networks to construct the pull-up networks for
CMOS gates.
EXAMPLE 3.3 Finding the dual of a function
Give the dual of the following unsimplified function:
f(x, y) = (1 ∧  x) ∨  (0 ∨ȳ).
The solution is given by
f D(x, y) = (0 ∨  x) ∧  (1 ∧  ȳ).
Table 3.5 shows that Equation (3.9) is valid for this particular function. You are asked to provide a
more general proof in Exercise 3.6.
Table 3.5. Evaluation of Equation (3.9) using our example function

--- Page 90 ---
x y f D(x, ȳ) f(x, y)
0 0 0 0
0 1 1 1
1 0 0 0
1 1 0 0
3.4 NORMAL FORM
Often we would like to compare two logical expressions to see whether they
represent the same function. We could verify equivalence by testing them on
every possible input combination – essentially filling out the truth tables and
comparing them. However, an easier approach is to put both expressions into
normal form, as a sum of product terms.3
For example, the normal form for the three-input majority function of
Equations (3.4)–(3.6) is given by
f(a, b, c) = (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b
∧  c). (3.10)
Each product term of a logic expression in normal form corresponds to one
row of the truth table with a true output for that function. These ANDed
expressions are called a minterm. In normal form, each of the products must
correspond to only one truth table row (minterm) and no more.
We can transform any logic expression into normal form by factoring it
about each input variable using the identity:
f(x1, . . . , xi, . . . , xn) = (xi ∧  f(x1, . . . ,1, . . . , xn)) ∨  (xi ∧  f(x1,
. . . ,0, . . . , xn)). (3.11)
For example, we can apply this method to factor the variable a out from the
majority function of Equation (3.6) as follows:

--- Page 91 ---
(3.12)
(3.13)
(3.14)
Repeating the expansion about b and c gives the majority function in normal
form, Equation (3.10).
EXAMPLE 3.4 Normal form
Write the following equation in normal form:
f(a, b, c) = a ∨  (b ∧  c).
We can find the normal form for this expression by writing the truth table, shown in Table 3.6, and
selecting all of the minterms for which the output is one. The answer is as follows:
f(a, b, c) = (ā ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c) ∨  (a ∧  b ∧  c).
Table 3.6. Truth table for Example 3.48
a b c f(a, b, c)
0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0
0 1 0 0
0 1 1 1
1 0 0 1
1 0 1 1
1 1 0 1
1 1 1 1
3.5 FROM EQUATIONS TO GATES
We often represent logical functions using a logic diagram, i.e., a schematic
drawing of gate symbols connected by lines. Three basic gate symbols are
shown in Figure 3.1. Each gate takes one or more binary inputs on its left
side and generates a binary output on its right side. The AND gate (Figure

--- Page 92 ---
3.1(a)) outputs a binary signal that is the AND of its inputs, c = a ∧  b. The
OR gate of Figure 3.1(b) computes the OR of its inputs, f = d ∨  e. The
inverter (Figure 3.1(c)) generates a signal that is the complement of its single
input, h = g. AND gates and OR gates may have more than two inputs.
Inverters always have a single input.
Figure 3.1. Logic symbols for (a) an AND gate, (b) an OR gate, and (c) an inverter.
Using these three gate symbols, we can draw a logic diagram for any
Boolean expression. To convert from an expression to a logic diagram, pick
an operator ( ∨  or ∧ ) at the top level of the expression and draw a gate of the
corresponding type. Label the inputs to the gate with the argument
subexpressions. Repeat this process on the subexpressions.
For example, a logic diagram for the majority function of Equation (3.6) is
shown in Figure 3.2. We start by converting the two ∨ s at the top level into a
three-input OR gate at the output. The inputs to this OR gate are the products
a ∧  b, a ∧  c, and b ∧  c. We then use three AND gates to generate these three
products. The net result is a logic circuit that computes the expression f = (a
∧  b) ∨  (a ∧  c) ∨  (b ∧  c).
Figure 3.2. Logic diagram for the three-input majority function.
Figure 3.3(a) shows a logic diagram for the exclusive-or or XOR function,
a logic function where the output is high only if exactly one of its inputs is
high (i.e., if one input is exclusively high): f = (a ∧  b) ∨  (a ∧  b). The two
inverters generate b and a, respectively. The AND gates then form the two
products a ∧  b and a ∧  b. Finally, the OR gate forms the final sum. The
exclusive-or function is used frequently enough that we give it its own gate

--- Page 93 ---
symbol, shown in Figure 3.3(c). It also has its own symbol, ⊕ , for use in
logic expressions: a ⊕  b = (a ∧  b) ∨  (a ∧  b).
Figure 3.3. The exclusive-or function: (a) logic diagram with inverters, (b) logic diagram with
inversion bubbles, and (c) gate symbol.
Because we are frequently complementing signals in logic diagrams, we
often drop the inverters and replace them with inversion bubbles, as shown
in Figure 3.3(b). This diagram represents the same function as Figure 3.3(a);
we have simply used a more compact notation for the inversion of a and b.
An inversion bubble may be placed on the input or the output of a gate. In
either location it inverts the sense of the signal. Putting an inversion bubble
on the input of a gate is equivalent to passing the input signal through an
inverter and then connecting the output of the inverter to the gate input.
An inversion bubble can be used on the output of a gate as well as the
input. Figure 3.4 shows this notation. An AND gate followed by an inverter
(Figure 3.4(a)) is equivalent to an AND gate with an inversion bubble on its
output (Figure 3.4(b)). By De Morgan’s theorem, this is also equivalent to an
OR gate with inversion bubbles on its input (Figure 3.4(c)). We refer to this
gate, which performs the function f = (a ∧  b), as a NAND gate (for NOT-
AND).


--- Page 94 ---
Figure 3.4. NAND and NOR gates. (a) An AND gate followed by an inverter realizes the NAND
function. (b) Replacing the inverter with an inversion bubble gives the NAND symbol. (c) Applying
De Morgan’s theorem gives an alternate NAND symbol. (d) An OR gate followed by an inverter gives
the NOR function. (e) Replacing the inverter with an inversion bubble gives the NOR symbol. (f)
Applying De Morgan’s theorem gives an alternate NOR symbol.
We can apply the same transformation to an OR gate followed by an
inverter (Figure 3.4(d)). We replace the inverter with an inversion bubble to
yield the NOR gate symbol of Figure 3.4(e), and by applying De Morgan’s
theorem we get the alternative NOR gate symbol of Figure 3.4(f). Because
common logic families, such as CMOS, provide only inverting gates, we
often use NAND and NOR gates as our primitive building blocks rather than
AND and OR.
Figure 3.5 shows how we convert from logic diagrams to equations.
Starting at the input, label the output of each gate with an equation. For
example, the AND gate labeled 1 (AND-1) computes a ∧  b and OR-2
computes c ∨  d directly from the inputs. Inverter-3 inverts a ∧  b, giving (a
∧  b) = a ∨  b. Note that this inverter could be replaced with an inversion
bubble on the input of AND-4. AND-4 combines the output of the inverter
with inputs c and d to generate (a ∨  b) ∧  c ∧  d. AND-5 combines the
outputs of gates 1 and 2 to give (c ∨  d) ∧  a ∧  b. Finally, OR-6 combines the
outputs of AND-4 and AND-5 to give the final result: ((a ∨  b) ∧  c ∧  d) ∨
((c ∨  d) ∧  a ∧  b).
Figure 3.5. Example of converting from a logic diagram to an equation.
EXAMPLE 3.5 From equation to schematic
Draw the schematic for a three-input majority function that uses only NAND gates.
We begin with the initial function and apply De Morgan’s theorem to convert our function to use
NAND gates:

--- Page 95 ---
The resulting schematic, using the alternate form of a three-input NAND gate, is shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6. A NAND-only implementation of the majority function, as derived in Example 3.5.
To convert back to an equation to check the answer, we first write the values of the intermediate
nodes. From top to bottom, they are a ∧  b, a ∧  c, and b ∧  c. The final three-input NAND gate returns
us to the original function:
3.6 BOOLEAN EXPRESSIONS IN VHDL
In this book we will be implementing digital systems by describing them in a
hardware description language named VHDL. VHDL code can be simulated,
compiled to a field-programmable gate array (FPGA), or synthesized into a
manufacturable chip. In this section we will introduce VHDL by showing
how it can be used to describe logic expressions.
VHDL uses the keywords and, or, xor and not to represent bitwise AND,
OR, XOR, and NOT, respectively. Using these symbols, we can write a
VHDL expression for our majority function Equation (3.6) as follows:
output <= (a and b) or (a and c) or (b and c) ;
The signal assignment compound delimiter “<=” indicates that this statement
assigns a value to signal output. The statement is terminated by a semicolon
(;). Note that and, or and xor have identical operator precedence in VHDL

--- Page 96 ---
and are evaluated from left to right. Hence, we must group subexpressions
using parentheses.
We can declare the majority gate to be a VHDL design entity, as shown in
Figure 3.7. The first two lines include definitions for the type std_logic
(described in Section 1.5). The next four lines are an entity declaration,
which specifies the design entity name, majority, and declares the design
entity’s inputs a, b, and c, and output output. The remaining lines are an
architecture body that contain our VHDL expression for the majority
function as a single concurrent assignment statement.
Figure 3.7. VHDL description of a majority gate.
To test our majority gate, we can write a test script (Figure 3.8) in VHDL
to simulate the gate for all eight possible combinations of input variables. At
the outset it is important to understand that this VHDL is not meant to be
synthesized into hardware (i.e., gates). To ensure that synthesis tools do not
try to compile this VHDL into gates we can surround the testbench VHDL
with a -- pragma translate_off and -- pragma translate_on pair.
Alternatively, we can place the testbench in a separate file from the design
entity and ensure that the testbench VHDL is not used as input for synthesis.

--- Page 97 ---
Figure 3.8. Test script to instantiate and exercise a majority gate.
The test script declares a top-level design entity called test_maj with no
inputs or outputs. The architecture body begins with a declarative section
after the keyword is and before the keyword begin that includes a
component declaration followed by two signal declarations.
A component declaration starts with the keyword component and follows
the same syntax as the entity declaration except that it ends with end
component. It is required so that the testbench can later instantiate the
majority design entity from Figure 3.7. It may seem redundant to specify
the interface of majority twice – once in the entity declaration part of
Figure 3.7 and again as a component declaration inside the design entity in
3.8. VHDL employs component declarations because they enable the
hardware designer to specify multiple architecture bodies for a given

--- Page 98 ---
component. Selecting the architecture body to use for a given component can
be done with an optional VHDL configuration declaration, which we will
describe in Section 7.1.8. In the absence of a configuration declaration, the
last architecture body for the design entity is used.
A signal declaration starts with the keyword signal followed by an
identifier, then a colon (:) delimiter, and then the type of the signal. A signal,
such as the three-bit signals count and output in Figure 3.8, can be accessed
only from within the architecture body where the signal is declared.
The rest of the architecture body after the keyword begin includes a
component instantiation statement, which creates an instance of the majority
design entity along with a process statement used to generate inputs to the
majority unit and for displaying its output. Note that unlike in a conventional
software language, these two statements are active at exactly the same time.
The component instantiation statement creates an instance of the majority
gate and gives it a label, DUT (device under test), of our choice. The
component instantiation statement connects the majority gate to the signals
count and output using a port map aspect identified by the keywords port
map.
The process statement begins with the keyword process. We will see later
that the process statement can be used both for specifying scripts and in
synthesizable logic. In this example we use a process statement to specify a
script and so we employ VHDL syntax including wait and loop that will
simplify the job of testing but should never be used for VHDL meant to
describe synthesizable logic. The body of the process statement includes a
set of sequential statements, the first of which sets the values of count to
"000". This is followed by a for loop that iterates eight times. The wait
statement inside the body of the for loop inserts a delay of 10 nanoseconds to
allow the output of the majority gate to stabilize. The next line, beginning
with the keyword report, prints out the values of count and output. The
VHDL-2008 function to_string(), defined in ieee.std_logic_1164, is
called twice and it converts its input argument from std_logic_vector to a
string that can be printed by report. The next line increments the value of
count. To use the addition operator, +, we need to include the use clause
“use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;”. The call to the VHDL-2008
function std.env.stop() after the loop stops simulation.
The result of running this test script is shown in Figure 3.9.

--- Page 99 ---
Figure 3.9. Output from test script of Figure 3.8.
EXAMPLE 3.6 VHDL design entity
Write the VHDL that directly corresponds to the form of the majority function
The VHDL design entity declaration is equivalent to Figure 3.7. We replace the signal assignment
statement with the following:
output <= not (not (a and b) and not (a and c) and not (b and c));
Note that in VHDL not has higher operator precedence than and, or, and xor. This form of the
majority function is less readable than the one shown in Figure 3.7; needlessly so, since synthesis tools
will transform the first form into the second automatically when this is warranted.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned the basics of Boolean algebra, the algebra
with elements 0 and 1 and operators ∧ , ∨ , and NOT. Boolean algebra is used
to analyze digital logic, which operates on 0s and 1s using these operators.
Boolean algebra is completely defined by the three axioms of identity,
annihilation, and negation. From the three axioms, we can infer a number of
useful properties, including the commutative, associative, and distributive
properties and De Morgan’s theorem. Using these and other properties, we
can manipulate equations in Boolean algebra. To compare Boolean
functions, we can express them in normal form, as a sum of minterms,
product terms containing all input variables.
Boolean algebra has the property of duality. We find the dual of a function
by substituting ∧  for ∨ , ∨  for ∧ , 1 for 0, and 0 for 1. Dual functions have
the useful property that f D(ā, b, ...) = f(a, b, ...). For example, the dual of a ∧
b is a ∨  b and a ∧  b = ā ∨  b.

--- Page 100 ---
A Boolean function can be expressed as a gate-level circuit by substituting
the gate symbols of Figure 3.1 for the ∧ , ∨ , and NOT operations in the
function. We use an inversion bubble as a shorthand for NOT. We can also
convert gate-level schematics to equations by propagating partial
expressions from the inputs to the output of each gate.
We can express Boolean functions in VHDL using a signal assignment
statement (<=) and substituting AND for ∧ , OR for ∨ ,and NOT for NOT. Once
expressed in VHDL, we can simulate a Boolean function, or encapsulate it in
a design entity that can be used to build more complex functions.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
George Boole formulated Boolean logic in the mid 1800s. He presented his
results in two texts that are now freely available online [13, 14]. De Morgan
described much of his work on logic formulations in an 1860 text [36].
Exercises
3.1 Prove absorption. Prove that the absorption property is true by using
perfect induction (i.e., enumerate all the possibilities).
3.2 Prove idempotence. Prove that the idempotence property is true by
using perfect induction.
3.3 Prove the associative property. Prove that the associative property is
true.
3.4 Prove the distributive property. Prove that the distributive property –
both ∧  over ∨  and ∨  over ∧  – istrue.
3.5 It’s not + and ×. Prove that the distributive property does not work for
distributing + over × with integers.
3.6 De Morgan’s theorem, I. Using perfect induction, prove De Morgan’s
theorem with four variables, specifically
w ∧  x ∧  y ∧  z = w ∨  x ∨  ȳ ∨  z
and
w ∨  x ∨  y ∨  z = w ∧  x ∧  ȳ ∧  z.
3.7 De Morgan’s theorem, II. Show that Equation (3.9) is indeed true by
successively applying De Morgan’s theorem to a logic function in

--- Page 101 ---
normal form.
3.8 Simplifying Boolean equations, I. Reduce the following Boolean
expression to a minimum number of literals: (x ∨  y) ∧  (x ∨ȳ).
3.9 Simplifying Boolean equations, II. Reduce the following Boolean
expression to a minimum number of literals: (x ∧  y ∧  z) ∨  (x ∧  y) ∨  (x
∧  y ∧  z).
3.10Simplifying Boolean equations, III. Reduce the following Boolean
expression to a minimum number of literals: (( y ∧  z) ∨  (x ∧  w)) ∧  ((x
∧  ȳ) ∨  (z ∧  w)).
3.11 Simplifying Boolean equations, IV. Reduce the following Boolean
expression to a minimum number of literals: (x ∧  y) ∨  (x ∧  ((w ∧  z) ∨
(w ∧  z))).
3.12Simplifying Boolean equations, V. Reduce the following Boolean
expression to a minimum number of literals: (w ∧  x ∧  ȳ) ∨  (w ∧  x ∧  ȳ
∧  z) ∨  (w ∧  x ∧  ȳ ∧  z).
3.13Dual functions, I. Find the dual function of the following function and
write it in normal form: f(x, y) = (x ∧  ȳ) ∨  (x ∧  y).
3.14Dual functions, II. Find the dual function of the following function and
write it in normal form: f(x, y, z) = (x ∧  y) ∨  (x ∧  z) ∨  (y ∧  z).
3.15Dual functions, III. Find the dual function of the following function
and write it in normal form: f(x, y, z) = (x ∧  (( y ∧  z) ∨  (ȳ ∧  z))) ∨  (x ∧
(( y ∧  z) ∨  (ȳ ∧  z))).
3.16Normal form, I. Rewrite the following Boolean expression in normal
form: f(x, y, z) = (x ∧  ȳ) ∨  (x ∧  z).
3.17Normal form, II. Rewrite the following Boolean expression in normal
form: f(x, y, z) = x.
3.18Normal form, III. Rewrite the following Boolean expression in normal
form: f(x, y, z) = (x ∧  (( y ∧  z) ∨  (ȳ ∧  z))) ∨  (x ∧  (( y ∧  z) ∨  (ȳ ∧  z))).
3.19Normal form, IV. Rewrite the following Boolean expression in normal
form: f(x, y, z) = 1 if exactly 0 or 2 inputs are 1.
3.20Equation from schematic, I. Write down a simplified Boolean
expression for the functions computed by the logic circuit of Figure
3.10(a).

--- Page 102 ---
Figure 3.10. Logic circuits for Exercises 3.20, 3.21, and 3.22.
3.21Equation from schematic, II. Write down a simplified Boolean
expression for the functions computed by the logic circuit of Figure
3.10(b).
3.22Equation from schematic, III. Write down a simplified Boolean
expression for the functions computed by the logic circuit of Figure
3.10(c).
3.23Schematic from equation, I. Draw a schematic for the following
unsimplified logic equation: f(x, y, z) = (x ∧  y ∧  z) ∨  (x ∧  ȳ ∧  z) ∨  (x
∧  ȳ ∧  z).
3.24Schematic from equation, II. Draw a schematic for the following
unsimplified logic equation: f(x, y, z) = ((x ∧  y) ∨  z) ∧  (x ∧  z).
3.25Schematic from equation, III. Draw a schematic for the following
unsimplified logic equation:
3.26Schematic from equation, IV. Draw a schematic for the following
unsimplified logic equation: f(x, y, z) = 1 if 1 or 2 inputs are 1.
3.27VHDL Write a VHDL design entity that implements the logic function
f(x, y, z) = (x ∧  y) ∨  (x ∧  z).
Write a test script to verify the operation of your design entity on all
eight combinations of x, y, and z. What function does this circuit
realize?
3.28Logic equations.

--- Page 103 ---
(a) Write out the unsimplified logic equation for the circuit of Figure
3.11.
(b) Write the dual form with no simplification.
(c) Draw the circuit for the unsimplified dual form.
(d) Simplify the original equation.
(e) Explain how the inverter and the last OR gate in the original
circuit work together to allow this simplification.
Figure 3.11. Logic circuit for Exercise 3.28.
3.29Choosing a representation. Which representation, (a), (b), or (c), for a
playing card requires the fewest gate inputs to check whether three
playing cards are all of the same suit (i.e., all hearts, all spades, all
diamonds, or all clubs). For the purposes of this answer, assume that an
XOR gate costs the same as three normal gates, e.g., a two-input XOR
costs as much as six gate inputs.
(a) Representing the suit as a four-bit one-hot number. A one-hot
number has exactly one bit set to 1. For example, clubs would be
represented by 0001, spades by 0010, diamonds by 0100, and
hearts by 1000.
(b) Representing the suit as a two-bit Gray-coded number. Gray
coding is explained in Exercise 1.9, an example of which is 00 for
clubs, 01 for spades, etc.
(c) Representing the suit with three bits that can be either one-hot or
zero-hot. This encoding can have zero (000) or one bit set (001,
010, 100).
1 For historical reasons, we still refer to a set of signals ANDed (ORed) together as a product (sum).
2 The astute reader will notice that this gets us back to where we started before making a copy of the
second term. However, it is useful to demonstrate the absorption property.
3 This sum-of-products normal form is often called the conjunctive normal form. Because of duality,
it is equally valid to use a product-of-sums normal form – often called the disjunctive normal form.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 104 ---
4
CMOS logic circuits
In this chapter we will see how to build logic circuits (gates) using
complementary metal– oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) transistors. We
start in Section 4.1 by examining how logic functions can be realized
using switches. A series combination of switches performs an AND
function while a parallel combination of switches performs an OR
function. We can build up more complex switch-logic functions by
building more complex series–parallel switch networks.
In Section 4.2 we present a very simple switch-level model of an MOS
transistor. CMOS transistors come in two flavors: NMOS and PMOS. For
purposes of analyzing the function of logic circuits, we consider an
NMOS transistor to be a switch that is closed when its gate is a logic “1”
and that passes only a logic “0.” A PMOS transistor is complementary – it
is a switch that is closed when its gate is a logic “0” and that passes only a
logic “1.” To model the delay and power of logic circuits (which we defer
to Chapter 5), we add a resistance and a capacitance to our basic switch.
This switch-level model is much simpler than the models used for MOS
circuit design, but is perfectly adequate to analyze the functionality and
performance of digital logic circuits.
Using our switch-level model, we see how to build gate circuits in
Section 4.3 by building a pull-down network of NMOS transistors and a
complementary pull-up network of PMOS transistors. A NAND gate, for
example, is realized with a series pull-down network of NMOS transistors
and a parallel pull-up network of PMOS transistors.
4.1 SWITCH LOGIC

--- Page 105 ---
In digital systems we use binary variables to represent information and
switches controlled by these variables to process information. Figure 4.1
shows a simple switch circuit. When binary variable a is false (0), Figure
4.1(a), the switch is open and the light is off. When a is true (1), the switch is
closed, current flows in the circuit, and the light is on (Figure 4.1(b)).
Figure 4.1. A logic variable a controls a switch that connects a voltage source to a light bulb. (a)
When a = 0, the switch is open and the bulb is off. (b) When a = 1, the switch is closed and the bulb is
on.
We can perform simple logic with networks of switches as illustrated in
Figure 4.2. Here, we omit the voltage source and light bulb for clarity, but
we still think of the switching network as being true when its two terminals
are connected; i.e., the light bulb, if connected, would be on.
Figure 4.2. AND and OR switch circuits. (a) Putting two switches in series, the circuit is closed only
if both logic variable a and logic variable b are true (a ∧  b). (b) Putting two switches in parallel, the
circuit is closed if either logic variable is true (a ∨  b). (b) For clarity we often omit the switch symbols
and just show the logic variables.
Suppose we want to build a switch network that will launch a missile only
if two switches (activated by responsible individuals) are closed. We can do
this as illustrated in Figure 4.2(a) by placing two switches in series
controlled by logic variables a and b, respectively. For clarity we usually

--- Page 106 ---
omit the switch symbols and denote a switch as a break in the wire labeled
by the variable controlling the switch as shown in the middle of the figure.
Only when both a and b are true are the two terminals connected. Thus, we
are assured that the missile will be launched only if both a and b agree that it
should be launched. Either a or b can stop the launch by not closing its
switch. The logic function realized by this switch network is f = a ∧  b.1
When launching missiles we want to make sure that everyone agrees to
launch before going forward. Hence we use an AND function. When
stopping a train, on the other hand, we would like to apply the brakes if
anyone sees a problem. In that case, we use an OR function, as shown in
Figure 4.2(b), placing two switches in parallel controlled by binary variables
a and b, respectively. In this case, the two terminals of the switch network
are connected if either a, b, or both a and b are true. The function realized by
the network is f = a ∨  b.
We can combine series and parallel networks to realize arbitrary logic
functions. For example, the network of Figure 4.3 realizes the function f = (a
∨  b) ∧  c. To connect the two terminals of the network, c must be true, and
either a or b must be true. For example, you might use a circuit like this to
engage the starter on a car if the key is turned c and either the clutch is
depressed a or the transmission is in neutral b.
Figure 4.3. An OR-AND switch network that realizes the function (a ∨  b) ∧  c.
More than one switch network can realize the same logical function. For
example, Figure 4.4 shows two different networks that both realize the three-
input majority function. Recall that a majority function returns true if the
majority of its inputs are true; in the case of a three-input function, this
occurs if at least two inputs are true. The logic function realized by both of
these networks is f = (a ∧  b) ∨  (a ∧  c) ∨  (b ∧  c).

--- Page 107 ---
Figure 4.4. Two realizations of a three-input majority function (or two out of three function), which is
true when at least two of its three inputs are true.
There are several ways to analyze a switch network to determine the
function it implements. One can enumerate all 2n combinations of the n
inputs to determine the combinations for which the network is connected.
Alternatively, one can trace all paths between the two terminals to determine
the sets of variables that, if true, make the function true. For a series–parallel
network, one can also reduce the network one step at a time by replacing a
series or parallel combination of switches with a single switch controlled by
an AND or OR of the previous switches’ expressions.
Figure 4.5 shows how the network of Figure 4.4(a) is analyzed by
replacement. The original network is shown in Figure 4.5(a). We first
combine the parallel branches labeled b and c into a single switch labeled b
∨  c (Figure 4.5(b)). The series combination of b and c is then replaced by b
∧  c (Figure 4.5(c)). In Figure 4.5(d) the switches labeled a and b ∨  c are
replaced by a ∧  (b ∨  c). The two parallel branches are then combined into [a
∧  (b ∨  c)] ∨  (b ∧  c) (Figure 4.5(e)). If we distribute the AND of a over (b ∨
c) we get the final expression in Figure 4.5(f).

--- Page 108 ---
Figure 4.5. We can analyze any series–parallel switch network by repeatedly replacing a series or
parallel subnetwork by a single switch controlled by the equivalent logic equation.
So far we have used only positive switches in our network – that is,
switches that are closed when their associated logic variable or expression is
true (1). The set of logic functions we can implement with only positive
switches is limited to monotonically increasing functions. To allow us to
implement all possible functions we need to introduce negative switches –
switches that are closed when their controlling logic variable is false (0). As
shown in Figure 4.6(a) we denote a negative switch by labeling its
controlling variable with either a prime a′ or an overbar ā. Both of these
indicate that the switch is closed when a is false (0). We can build logic
networks that combine positive and negative switches. For example, Figure
4.6(b) shows a network that realizes the function f = a ∧  b.
Figure 4.6. A negated logic variable is denoted by a prime a′ or an overbar ā. (a) This switch network
is closed (true) when variable a = 0. (b) A switch network that realizes the function a ∧  b.
Often we will control both positive and negative switches with the same
logic variable. For example, Figure 4.7(a) shows a switch network that
realizes the two-input exclusive-or (XOR) function. The upper branch of the

--- Page 109 ---
circuit is connected if a is true and b is false, while the lower branch is
connected if a is false and b is true. Thus this network is connected (true) if
exactly one of a or b is true. It is open (false) if both a and b are true or false.
Figure 4.7. Exclusive-or (XOR) switch networks are true (closed) when an odd number of their inputs
are true. (a) Two-input XOR network. (b) Three-input XOR network.
This circuit should be familiar to anyone who has ever used a light in a
hallway or stairway controlled by two switches, one at either end of the hall
or stairs. Changing the state of either switch changes the state of the light.
Each switch is actually two switches – one positive and one negative –
controlled by the same variable: the position of the switch control.2 They are
wired exactly as shown in the figure – with switches a, ā at one end of the
hall, and b, b at the other end.
In a long hallway, we sometimes would like to be able to control the light
from the middle of the hall as well as from the ends. This can be
accomplished with the three-input XOR network shown in Figure 4.7(b). An
n-input XOR function is true when an odd number of the inputs are true.
This three-input XOR network is connected if exactly one of the inputs a, b,
or c is true or if all three of them are true. To see this, you can enumerate all
eight combinations of a, b, and c or you can trace paths. You cannot,
however, analyze this network by replacement as with Figure 4.5 because it
is not a series–parallel network. If you want to have more fun analyzing non-
series–parallel networks, see Exercises 4.1 and 4.2.
In the hallway application, the switches associated with a and c are placed
at either end of the hallway, and the switches associated with b are placed in
the center of the hall. As you have probably observed, if we want to add
more switches controlling the same light, we can repeat the four-switch
pattern of the b switches as many times as necessary, each time controlled by
a different variable.3
EXAMPLE 4.1 Series–parallel networks
Draw and simplify a series–parallel circuit that realizes the function f(d, c, b, a) = 1ifdcba is a legal
thermometer encoding (0000, 0001, 0011, 0111, or 1111).

--- Page 110 ---
Figure 4.8 shows the steps we take to find a solution. First, we begin in Figure 4.8(a) by drawing
the networks represented by the five minterms in parallel. Next, in Figure 4.8(b), we eliminate
unnecessary variables from the two leftmost (d) and rightmost (a) paths. Finally, we collapse the a ∧  b
terms into a single path in parallel with both c and d ∧c. Note that we cannot combine the two d ∧c
terms, since doing so creates an illegal path through c ∧  b.
Figure 4.8. The solution for Example 4.1. In parts (a)–(c) we iteratively reduce our initial series–
parallel network. In parts (d)–(f) we derive the Boolean expression shown by (c).
To check our solution, we can formulate the function represented by Figure 4.8(c). We show our
work in Figures 4.8(d)–(f). We arrive at the following equation:
f(d, c, b, a) = ((c ∨  (d ∧c)) ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d ∧c ∧  b).
This is another form of our original function, and verifies our answer.
4.2 SWITCH MODEL OF MOS TRANSISTORS
Most modern digital systems are built using CMOS (complementary metal–
oxide– semiconductor) field-effect transistors as switches. Figure 4.9 shows

--- Page 111 ---
the physical structure and schematic symbol for a MOS transistor. A MOS
transistor is formed on a semiconductor substrate and has three terminals:4
the gate, source, and drain. The source and drain are identical terminals
formed by diffusing an impurity into the substrate. The gate terminal is
formed from polycrystalline silicon (called polysilicon or just poly for short)
and is insulated from the substrate by a thin layer of oxide. The name MOS,
a holdover from the days when the gate terminals were metal (aluminum),
refers to the layering of the gate (metal), gate oxide (oxide), and substrate
(semiconductor).5
Figure 4.9. A MOS field-effect transistor (FET) has three terminals. Current passes between the
source and drain (identical terminals) when the device is on. The voltage on the gate controls whether
the device is on or off. (a) The structure of a MOSFET with the substrate removed. (b) A side view of
a MOSFET. (c) Schematic symbols for an n-channel FET (NFET) and a p-channel FET (PFET). (d)
Top view of a MOSFET, showing its width W and length L.

--- Page 112 ---
Figure 4.9(d), a top view of the MOSFET, shows the two dimensions that
can be varied by the circuit or logic designer to determine transistor
performance:6 the device width W and the device length L. The gate length L
is the distance that charge carriers (electrons or holes) must travel to get
from the source to the drain, and thus is directly related to the speed of the
device. Gate length is so important that we typically refer to a semiconductor
process by its gate length. For example, most new designs today (2015) are
implemented in 20 nm CMOS processes (i.e., CMOS processes with a
minimum gate length of 20 nm). Almost all logic circuits use the minimum
gate length supported by the process. This gives the fastest devices with the
least power dissipation.
The channel width W controls the strength of the device. The wider the
device, the more charge carriers can traverse the device in parallel. Thus the
larger W, the lower the on resistance of the transistor and the higher the
current the device can carry. A large W makes the device faster by allowing it
to discharge a load capacitance more quickly. Alas, reduced resistance comes
at a cost – the gate capacitance of the device also increases with W. Thus as
W increases it takes longer to charge or discharge the gate of a device.
Figure 4.9(c) shows the schematic symbols for an n-channel MOSFET
(NFET) and a p-channel MOSFET (PFET). In an NFET, the source and
drain are n-type semiconductor in a p-type substrate and the charge carriers
are electrons. In a PFET the types are reversed – the source and drain are p-
type in an n-type substrate (usually an n-well diffused in a p-type substrate)
and the carriers are holes. If you do not have a clue what n-type and p-type
semiconductors, holes, and electrons are, don’t worry; we will abstract them
away shortly. Bear with us for the moment.
Figure 4.10 illustrates a simple digital model of operation for an n-channel
FET.7 As shown in Figure 4.10(a), when the gate of the NFET is a logic 0,
the source and drain are isolated from one another by a pair of p–n junctions
(back-to-back diodes), and hence no current flows from drain to source, IDS
= 0. This is reflected in the schematic symbol in the middle panel. We model
the NFET in this state with an open switch, as shown in the bottom panel.

--- Page 113 ---
Figure 4.10. Simplified operation of an n-channel MOSFET. (a) When the gate is at the same voltage
as the source, no current flows in the device because the drain is isolated by a reverse-biased p–n
junction (a diode). (b) When a positive voltage is applied to the gate, it induces negative carriers in the
channel beneath the gate, effectively inverting the p-type silicon to become n-type silicon. This
connects the source and drain, allowing a current IDS to flow. The top panel shows what happens
physically in the device. The middle panel shows the schematic view. The bottom panel shows a
switch model of the device.
When the gate terminal is a logic 1 and the source terminal is a logic 0, as
shown in Figure 4.10(b), the NFET is turned on. The positive voltage
between the gate and source induces a negative charge in the channel
beneath the gate. The presence of these negative charge carriers (electrons)
makes the channel effectively n-type and forms a conductive region between
the source and drain. The voltage between the drain and the source
accelerates the carriers in the channel, resulting in a current flow from drain
to source, IDS. The middle panel shows the schematic view of the on NFET.
The bottom panel shows a switch model of the on NFET. When the gate is 1
and the source is 0, the switch is closed.
It is important to note that if the source8 is 1, the switch will not be closed,
even if the gate is 1, because there is no net voltage between the gate and
source to induce the channel charge. The switch is not open in this state

--- Page 114 ---
either, because it will turn on if either terminal drops a threshold voltage
below the 1 voltage. With source = 1 and gate = 1, the NFET is in an
undefined state (from a digital perspective). The net result is that an NFET
can reliably pass only a logic 0 signal. To pass a logic 1 requires a PFET.
Operation of a PFET, illustrated in Figure 4.11, is identical to the NFET
with the 1s and 0s reversed. When the gate is 0 and the source is 1, the
device is on. When the gate is 1, the device is off. When the gate is 0 and the
source is 0, the device is in an undefined state. Because the source must be 1
for the device to be reliably on, the PFET can reliably pass only a logic 1.
This nicely complements the NFET, which can only pass a 0.
Figure 4.11. A p-channel MOSFET operates identically to an NFET with all 0s and 1s switched. (a)
When the gate is high the PFET is off regardless of source and drain voltages. (b) When the gate is
low and the source is high the PFET is on and current flows from source to drain.
The NFET and PFET models of Figures 4.10 and 4.11 accurately model
the function of most digital logic circuits. However, to model the delay and
power of logic circuits we must complicate our model slightly by adding a
resistance in series with the source and drain and a capacitance from the gate
to ground, as shown in Figure 4.12.9 The capacitance on the gate node is
proportional to the area of the device, WL. The resistance, on the other hand,
is proportional to the aspect ratio of the device, L/W. We write the
capacitance and resistance equations as follows:
Cg = WLKC, (4.1)
(4.2)

--- Page 115 ---
where KC is a constant for capacitance measured in farads per unit area, and
KR is a resistance constant measured in ohms per square. For NFETs and
PFETs, KC is the same, but KR is different by the ratio KP. PFETs have a
higher resistance than NFETs.
Figure 4.12. The electrical model of a PFET (a) and an NFET (b). The gate has a capacitance
proportional to its area (WL). The resistance also increases with gate length, but is inversely
proportional to width.
Figure 4.13(a) shows the current of a transistor (both an NFET and a
PFET) as a function of the input voltage. In steady-state digital systems, we
operate only at the two edges of the plot, where the difference in current is
orders of magnitude. This validates our switch model. Figure 4.13 also
shows that the ratio of NFET drive current to PFET drive current (KP)is
approximately 2.5. Figure 4.13(b) indicates that as the source to drain
voltage reaches 0, transistors stop conducting current (and dissipating
power). Figure 4.14 shows the steady-state output of an inverter as a
function of the input. This graph shows the noise immunity of a CMOS
circuit at both low and high inputs; small changes, or noise, in the input
voltage do not affect the output voltage.

--- Page 116 ---
Figure 4.13. Simulated plots of 130 nm transistor characteristics. We show the drain current as a
function of gate voltage (a) and drain voltage (b) for both an NFET (solid line) and a PFET (dashed
line).
For convenience, and to make our discussion independent of a particular
process generation, we will express W and L in units of Lmin, the minimum
gate length of a technology. For example, in a 28 nm technology, we will
refer to a device with L = 28 nm and W = 224 nm as an L = 1, W = 8 device,
or just as an W = 8 device since L = 1 is the default. In most cases we will
scale W by Wmin = 8Lmin and refer to a minimum-sized W/L = 8deviceasa
unit-sized device. We then size other devices in relation to this unit-sized
device.

--- Page 117 ---
Figure 4.14. Output voltage of an inverter as a function of input voltage.
Table 4.1. Device parameters for typical 130 nm and 28 nm CMOS processes
All numbers assume a minimum gate length and variable gate width
Parameter Value (130 nm) Value (28 nm) Units
KC 2.0 × 10−16 2.8 × 10−17
KRN 2 × 104 4.2 × 104 ohms/square
KP 2.5 1.3
KRP = KPKRN 5 × 104 5.5 × 104 ohms/square
τN = KCKRN 3.9 × 10−12 1.2 × 10−12 seconds
τP = KCKRP 9.8 × 10−12 1.5 × 10−12 seconds

--- Page 118 ---
Table 4.1 gives typical values of KC, KRN, and KRP for 130 nm and 28 nm
technologies. The key parameters here are τN and τP, the basic time constants
of the technology. As technology scales, KC 
remains roughly proportional to gate length and can be approximated as
KC ≈ 1.25 × 10−9Lmin, (4.3)
where Lmin is expressed in meters. The sheet resistance, and thus delay, of
the gate is no longer proportional to length. The resistance of n-type
transistors has increased, while the PFET resistance has remained constant.10
EXAMPLE 4.2 Resistance and capacitance
For both 130 nm and 28 nm technologies, what is the resistance (Rs) and gate capacitance (Cg) of an
NFET where L = 1 and W = 32? What is the size and capacitance of a PFET with the same Rs?
First, for the NFET:
For the PFET, we know the resistance and solve for width and capacitance:

--- Page 119 ---
4.3 CMOS GATE CIRCUITS
In Section 4.1 we learned how to do logic with switches, and in Section 4.2
we saw that MOS transistors can, for most digital purposes, be modeled as
switches. Putting this information together, we can see how to make logic
circuits with transistors.
A well-formed logic circuit should support the digital abstraction by
generating an output that can be applied to the input of another, similar logic
circuit. Thus, we need a circuit that generates a voltage on its output – not
just one that connects two terminals together. The circuit must also be
restoring, so that degraded input levels will result in restored output levels.
To achieve this, the voltage on the output must be derived from a supply
voltage, not from one of the inputs.
4.3.1Basic CMOS gate circuit
A static CMOS gate circuit realizes a logic function f while generating a
restoring output that is compatible with its input as shown in Figure 4.15.
When function f is true, a PFET switch network connects output terminal x
to the positive supply (VDD). When function f is false, output x is connected
to the negative supply by an NFET switch network. This obeys our
constraints of passing only logic 1 (high) signals through PFET switch

--- Page 120 ---
networks and logic 0 (low) signals through NFET networks. It is important
that the functions realized by the PFET network and the NFET network be
complements. If the functions should overlap (both be true at the same time),
a short circuit from the power supply to ground results, drawing a large
amount of current, and possibly causing permanent damage to the circuit. If
the two functions do not cover all input states (there are some input states
where neither is true), then the output is undefined in these states.
Figure 4.15. A CMOS gate circuit consists of a PFET switch network that pulls the output high when
function f is true and an NFET switch network that pulls the output low when f is false.
Because NFETs turn on with a high input and generate a low output and
PFETs are the opposite, we can only generate inverting logic functions with
static CMOS gates. A positive (negative) transition on the input of a single
CMOS gate circuit can either cause a negative (positive) transition on the
output or no change at all. Such a logic function, where transitions in one
direction on the inputs cause transitions in just a single direction on the
output, is called a monotonic logic function. If the transitions on the outputs
are in the opposite direction to the transitions on the inputs, it is a monotonic
decreasing or inverting logic function. If the transitions are in the same
direction, it is a monotonic increasing function. To realize a non-inverting or
non-monotonic logic function requires multiple stages of CMOS gates.
We can use the principle of duality, Equation (3.9), to simplify the design
of gate circuits. If we have an NFET pull-down network that realizes a
function fn(x1, ..., xn),we know that our gate will realize function fp = fn(x1,
..., xn). By duality, we know that 
  So, for
the PFET pull-up network, we want the dual function with inverted inputs.
The PFETs give us the inverted inputs, since they are “on” when the input is

--- Page 121 ---
low. To get the dual function, we take the pull-down network and replace
ANDs with ORs and vice versa. In a switch network, this means that a series
connection in the pull-down network becomes a parallel connection in the
pull-up network and vice versa.
4.3.2Inverters, NANDs, and NORs
The simplest CMOS gate circuit is the inverter, shown in Figure 4.16(a).
Here the PFET network is a single transistor that connects output x to the
positive supply whenever input a is low: x = a. Similarly, the NFET network
is a single transistor that pulls output x low whenever the input is high.
Figure 4.16. A CMOS inverter circuit. (a) A PFET connects x to1whena = 0 and an NFET connects x
to 0 when a = 1. (b) Logic symbols for an inverter. The bubble on the input or output denotes the NOT
operation.
Figure 4.16(b) shows the schematic symbols for an inverter. The symbol
is a rightward-facing triangle with a bubble on its input or output. The
triangle represents an amplifier – indicating that the signal is restored. The
bubble (sometimes called an inversion bubble) implies negation. The bubble
on the input is considered to apply a NOT operation to the signal before it is
input to the amplifier. Similarly, a bubble on the output is considered to
apply a NOT operation to the output signal after it is amplified. Logically,
the two symbols are equivalent. It doesn’t matter whether we consider the
signal to be inverted before or after amplification. We choose one of the two
symbols to obey the bubble rule, which is as follows:
Bubble rule Where possible, signals that are output from a gate
with an inversion bubble on its output shall be input to a gate with
an inversion bubble on its input.

--- Page 122 ---
Schematics drawn using the bubble rule are easier to read than schematics
where the polarity of logic signals changes from one end of the wire to the
other. We shall see many examples of this in Chapter 6.
Figure 4.17 shows some example NFET and PFET switch networks that
can be used to build NAND and NOR gate circuits. A parallel combination
of PFETs (Figure 4.17(b)) connects the output high if either input is low, so f
= a ∨  b = a ∧  b. Applying our principle of duality, this switch network is
used in combination with a series NFET network (Figure 4.17(c)) to realize
a NAND gate. The complete NAND gate circuit is shown in Figure 4.18(a),
and two schematic symbols for the NAND are shown in Figure 4.18(b). The
upper symbol is an AND symbol (square left side, half-circle right side) with
an inversion bubble on the output – indicating that we AND inputs a and b
and then invert the output, f = a ∧  b. The lower symbol is an OR symbol
(curved left side, pointy right side) with inversion bubbles on all inputs – the
inputs are inverted and then the inverted inputs are ORed, f = a ∨  b. By De
Morgan’s law (and duality), these two functions are equivalent. As with the
inverter, we select between these two symbols to observe the bubble rule.
Figure 4.17. Switch networks used to realize NAND and NOR gates. (a) Series PFETs connect the
output c high when all inputs are low, f = a ∧  b = a ∨  b.(b) Parallel PFETs connect the output if either
input is low, f = a ∨  b = a ∧  b. (c) Series NFETs pull the output low when both inputs are high, f = a
∧  b. (d) Parallel NFETs pull the output low when either input is true, f = a ∨  b. NAND gates are
composed of networks (b) and (c), whereas NOR gates connect (a) and (d).

--- Page 123 ---
Figure 4.18. A CMOS NAND gate. (a) Circuit diagram: the NAND has a parallel PFET pull-up
network and a series NFET pull-down network. (b) Schematic symbols: the NAND function can be
thought of as an AND with an inverted output (top) or an OR with inverted inputs (bottom).
A NOR gate is constructed with a series network of PFETs and a parallel
network of NFETs, as shown in Figure 4.19(a). A series combination of
PFETs (Figure 4.17(a)) connects the output to 1 when a and b are both low, f
= a ∧  b = a ∨  b. Applying duality, this circuit is used in combination with a
parallel NFET pull-down network (Figure 4.17(d)). The schematic symbols
for the NOR gate are shown in Figure 4.19(b). As with the inverter and the
NAND, we can choose between inverted inputs and inverted outputs
depending on the bubble rule.
Figure 4.19. A CMOS NOR gate. (a) Circuit diagram: the NOR has a series PFET pull-up network
and a parallel NFET pull-down network. (b) Schematic symbols: the NOR can be thought of as an OR
with an inverted output or an AND with inverted inputs.
EXAMPLE 4.3 Four-input NAND
Draw the transistor-level implementation of a four-input NAND gate, f = a ∧  b ∧  c ∧  d.

--- Page 124 ---
The implementation of this gate extends the two-input NAND gate by adding two more NFETs in
series with the first two and two parallel PFETs. The final gate is shown in Figure 4.20.
Figure 4.20. The transistor-level implementation of a four-input NAND gate.
4.3.3Complex gates
We are not restricted to building gates simply from series and parallel
networks. We can use arbitrary series–parallel networks, or even networks
that are not series–parallel. For example, Figure 4.21(a) shows the transistor-
level design for an AND-OR-invert (AOI) gate. This circuit computes the
function f = (a ∧  b) ∨  c. The pull-down network has a series connection of a
and b in parallel with c. The pull-up network is the dual of this network, with
a parallel connection of a and b in series with c. The AOI schematic symbol
is shown in Figure 4.21(b).

--- Page 125 ---
Figure 4.21. An AND-OR-invert (AOI) gate. (a) Transistor-level implementation uses a parallel–series
NFET pull-down network and its dual series–parallel PFET pull-up network. (b) Two schematic
symbols for the AOI gate.
Figure 4.22 shows a majority-invert gate. We cannot build a single-stage
majority gate since it is a monotonic increasing function and gates can only
realize inverting functions. However, we can build the complement of the
majority function as shown. The majority is an interesting function in that it
is its own dual. That is, maj(a, b, c) = maj(a, b, c). Because of this we can
implement the majority gate with a pull-up network that is identical to the
pull-down network, as shown in Figure 4.22(a). The majority function is also
a symmetric logic function in that the inputs are all equivalent. Thus we can
permute the inputs to the PFET and NFET networks without changing the
function.

--- Page 126 ---
Figure 4.22. A majority-invert gate. The output is false if two or three of the inputs are true. (a)
Implementation with symmetric pull-up and pull-down networks. (b) Implementation with a pull-up
network that is a dual of the pull-down network. (c) Schematic symbols: the function is still majority
irrespective of whether the inversion is on the input or the output.
A more conventional implementation of the majority-invert gate is shown
in Figure 4.22(b). The NFET pull-down network here is the same as for
Figure 4.22(a), but the PFET pull-up network has been replaced by a dual
network – one that replaces each series element with a parallel element and
vice versa. The parallel combination of b and c in series with a in the pull-
down network, for example, translates to a series combination of b and c in
parallel with a in the pull-up network. A PFET pull-up network that is the
dual of the NFET pull-down network will always give a switching function
that is the complement of the pull-down network because of Equation (3.9).
Figure 4.22(c) shows two possible schematic symbols for the majority-
invert gate. Because the majority function is self-dual, it does not matter
whether we put the inversion bubbles on the inputs or the output. The
function is a majority either way. If at least two out of the three inputs are
high, the output will be low – a majority with a low-true output. It is also the
case that if at least two of the three inputs are low, the output will be high – a
majority with low-true inputs.
Strictly speaking, we cannot make a single-stage CMOS exclusive-or
(XOR) gate because XOR is a non-monotonic function. A positive transition
on an input may cause either a positive or a negative transition on an output,
depending on the state of the other inputs. However, if we have inverted
versions of the inputs, we can realize a two-input XOR function as shown in

--- Page 127 ---
Figure 4.23(a), taking advantage of the switch network of Figure 4.7(a). A
three-input XOR function can be realized as shown in Figure 4.23(b). The
switch networks here are not series– parallel networks. If inverted inputs are
not available, it is more efficient to realize a two-input XOR gate using two
CMOS gates in series, as shown in Figure 4.23(c). We leave the transistor-
level design of this circuit as an exercise. An XOR symbol is shown in
Figure 4.23(d).
Figure 4.23. Exclusive-or (XOR) gates. Transistor-level diagrams for a two-input (a) and three-input
(b) XOR gate at top. (c) Two-level schematic for computing the XOR of two values. (d) Schematic

--- Page 128 ---
symbol for an XOR gate.
EXAMPLE 4.4 CMOS gate synthesis
Draw a complex gate that outputs a 0 if and only if the input, cba, is a legal thermometer-coded signal.
First, we write the Boolean function and reduce it as follows:
Thus, our NFET switch-network function is given by
fn = (c ∧  b) ∨  (b ∧  a).
Next, in order to draw the PFET array correctly, we find the dual of our NFET function:
fp(c, b, a) = (c ∨  b) ∧  (b ∨  a).
Figure 4.24 shows our final answer. In order to implement this circuit in a single stage, the
complements to inputs c and b are required.
Figure 4.24. Schematic for the CMOS circuit to detect whether inputs abc represent a legal
thermometer encoding.
4.3.4Tri-state circuits
On occasion we want to build a distributed multiplexer function where we
drive a value onto a signal node from point A when logic signal a is true and
from point B when logic signal b is true. We can realize this functionality

--- Page 129 ---
with a tri-state inverter. This circuit, shown in Figures 4.25(a) and (b), drives
a onto x when e is true and presents a high impedance (drives neither 1 nor
0) to the output when e is false. When the enable e is high (e is low), the
middle two transistors are on. The outer transistors, controlled by a, then
function as a normal inverter. With e low (e high), the enable transistors are
off and no value is driven to the output. In this state, the value at the output
is initially equal to the previous output, but will eventually leak into an
unknown state. In VHDL, a wire that is not being driven is denoted with a
’Z’ symbol.
Figure 4.25. A tri-state inverter has two inputs and a single output, (a). Transistor-level schematic, (b),
when enable e is low, there is no supply connected to the output. When e is high, the output is driven
to a. Four tri-state inverters implement a bus or distributed multiplexer, (c). When exactly one enable
ei is high, the output is ai. When all enables are low, the output is indeterminate. If multiple enables
are high, permanent damage may occur.
The tri-state inverter is not a gate as defined in Section 4.3.1 because its
output is not a restored logic function of its input. Its pull-down function
fn(a, e) = a ∧  e is not equal to the complement of its pull-up function fp =
a∧e. The no-pull function fz = fn∧fp = e is true when fn and fp are both false,
and indicates when x goes to the high impedance or z state. Because this
circuit produces three output states, 0, 1, and z, we refer to it as a tri-state
circuit. This is not to be confused with ternary logic circuits that use signals
that can take on three values.
Tri-state circuits are not restricted to inverters. We can modify any CMOS
gate circuit to gate the output off when an enable signal e is low. We are also

--- Page 130 ---
not restricted to a single enable signal. An arbitrary logic function can
determine when the circuit is enabled. This function can differ for pull-up
and pull-down, and the enable function can be a function of the other circuit
inputs. Any CMOS circuit where fz ≠ 0 is a tri-state circuit. Not all of these
are useful.
Tri-state inverters can be used to realize multiplexers and distributed
multiplexers, as shown in Figure 4.25(c). Here, four tri-state inverters all
drive the same output wire, x. If exactly one enable signal ei is asserted, x =
ai. If all enable signals are low, there is no drive to x –it is in the high-
impedance or z state. If more than one enable is asserted simultaneously
(even for a very short period of time), a short circuit may form, causing
static current to flow from the power supply of one gate to the ground of
another. At the very least, this increases power dissipation and gives an
invalid output. At worst, the high currents involved can vaporize metal
traces, irreversibly damaging the chip. Even if only one enable signal is
asserted each clock cycle, skew (see Chapter 15) between the clocks
generating the different enables can lead to a fatal overlap. Distributed
multiplexers, which often motivate the use of tri-state circuits, are
particularly vulnerable because a large clock skew can develop over the
distance between point A and point B.
Because of the potential for a short circuit, tri-state circuits should be
avoided. If they are used, strong measures should be taken to ensure that
there is no possibility of overlap between enable signals. One approach is to
leave an idle cycle – with all enable signals low – between the assertion of
one enable signal and another. Alternatively, one can ensure a break before
make action by designing the circuits driving the enable signals to have a
long delay on the rising edge and a short delay on the falling edge – with the
difference in delays being large enough to compensate for clock skew and
other factors. In most cases, the best approach is to build the required
function – even a distributed multiplexer or bus (see Section 24.2) – with
static CMOS gates (NANDs and NORs).
4.3.5Circuits to avoid
Before closing this chapter it is worth examining a few more circuits that are
not gates and do not work but represent common errors in CMOS circuit
design. Figure 4.26 shows four representative mistakes. The would-be buffer

--- Page 131 ---
in Figure 4.26(a) does not work because it attempts to pass a 1 through a
PFET and a 0 through an NFET. The transistors cannot reliably pass those
values and so the output signal is undefined – attenuated from the input
swing at best.
Figure 4.26. Four circuits that are not gates and should not be used: circuit (a) attempts to pass a 1
through an NFET and a 0 through a PFET; circuit (b) does not restore high output values; circuit (c)
does not drive the output when a = 1 and b = 0; circuit (d) conducts static current when a ≠ b.
The AND-NOT circuit of Figure 4.26(b) does in fact implement the logical
function f = a ∧  b. However, it violates the digital abstraction in that it does
not restore its output. If b = 0, a noise on input a is passed directly to the
output.11 Any noise on the output is also passed onto the input signal and all
of the input’s driven gates.
The circuit of Figure 4.26(c) leaves its output disconnected when a = 1
and b = 0. Owing to parasitic capacitance, the previous output value will be
stored for a short period of time on the output node. However, after a period,
the stored charge will leak off and the output node becomes an undefined
value. The final circuit, Figure 4.26(d), will have both the pull-up and pull-
down networks conducting when a and b are not equal. This static current
from power to ground outputs an undefined logic value, wastes power, and
potentially damages the chip.
Summary
CMOS gate circuits are the basic building blocks of modern digital systems.
We derive gate circuits from switch logic using complementary MOS
(CMOS) transistors.

--- Page 132 ---
A switch connects its terminals when it is closed. A series connection of
switches connects its terminals only when all switches in the circuit are
closed, an AND function. Similarly, a parallel connection of switches
performs an OR function. Series–parallel networks of switches can perform
arbitrary combinations of AND and OR functions.
NMOS and PMOS (n-type and p-type MOS) transistors act as switches
with restrictions. An NMOS transistor, or NFET, is on (switch closed) when
its gate terminal is high (logic 1) but it passes only low signals (logic 0s). A
PMOS transistor, or PFET, the complementary device, is on when its gate is
low and passes only high signals.
We construct a CMOS gate circuit that implements function f by
constructing a pull-down network of NFETs that pulls the output low when f
is true and a pull-up network of PFETs that pulls the output high when f is
true. Because the inputs of PFETs are inverting, using a pull-up network that
is the dual of the pull-down network gives the required function. For
example, to make a NAND gate, we use a series connection of NFETs for
the pull-down network and a parallel connection of PFETs for the pull-up
network. In addition to NAND gates (series NFETs, parallel PFETs) and
NOR gates (parallel NFETs, series PFETs), we can build complex gates, like
AND-OR-invert gates, that perform arbitrary combinations of ANDs and
ORs, with a final inversion.
Because of the properties of NFETs and PFETs, all CMOS gates are
monotonically decreasing; i.e., a rising input transition can never result in a
rising output transition. Multiple stages of CMOS gates are required in order
to build increasing functions.
To make our logic circuit schematic diagrams more readable, we employ
the bubble rule. Where possible, if there is a bubble at one end of a wire, we
draw the gate at the other end of the wire so there is a bubble at that end of
the wire as well.
A tri-state circuit has an output that can be put in a high-impedance or
unconnected state allowing several tri-state circuits to drive a single signal
node. Because of the potential for short circuits between tri-state circuits
driving the same node, these circuits should be avoided when possible.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES

--- Page 133 ---
Two of the first studies into using switch networks came from Shannon
[100] and Montgomerie [82]. One of the first to simulate MOSFET circuits
using the switch model was Bryant in the early 1980s [22].
A digital circuit design text such as Rabaey et al. [94] is a good source of
more detailed information on digital logic circuits.
Weste and Harris’s textbook [112] provides further information about gate
layouts and VLSI. Finally, readers interested in the physics of MOSFETs
should refer to Muller, Kamins, and Chan’s text [85].
Exercises
4.1 Non-series–parallel analysis I. Write down the logic function that
describes the conditions under which the switch network of Figure
4.27(a) connects its two terminals. Note that this is not a series–parallel
network.
Figure 4.27. Switch network for Exercises 4.1 and 4.2.
4.2 Non-series–parallel analysis II. Write down the logic function that
describes the conditions under which the switch network of Figure
4.27(b) connects its two terminals.
4.3 Series–parallel synthesis I. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit that
implements the function f(x, y, z) = ((x ∨ȳ) ∧  ((y ∧  z) ∨x)) ∨  (x ∧  y ∧
z).
4.4 Series–parallel synthesis II. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit that
implements the function f(w, x, y, z) = 1 if at least one input is true.
4.5 Series–parallel synthesis III. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit that
implements the function f(w, x, y, z) = 1 if at least two inputs are true.
4.6 Series–parallel synthesis IV. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit that
implements the function f(w, x, y, z) = 1 if at least three inputs are true.
4.7 Series–parallel synthesis V. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit that
implements the function f(w, x, y, z) = 1 if all four inputs are true.

--- Page 134 ---
4.8 Series–parallel synthesis VI. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit that
implements the function f(w, x, y, z) = 1 if exactly one or three inputs
are true.
4.9 Series–parallel synthesis VII. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit that
implements the function f(x, y, z) = 1 if inputs xyz represent either 1 or
a prime number in binary (xyz = 001, 010, 011, 101, 111).
4.10Series–parallel synthesis VIII. Draw a series–parallel switch circuit
that implements the function f(w, x, y, z) = 1 if inputs wxyz represent 1
or a prime number in binary (wxyz = 0001, 0010, 0011, 0101, 0111,
1011, 1101).
4.11 CMOS switch models, I. Draw the switch models (using open and
closed switches in place of the transistors) for Figure 4.22(a) and
inputs a = 1, b = 0, c = 0.
4.12CMOS switch models, II. Draw the switch models (using open and
closed switches in place of the transistors) for Figure 4.22(a) and
inputs a = 1, b = 1, c = 1.
4.13CMOS switch models, III. Draw the switch models (using open and
closed switches in place of the transistors) for the following diagram
and input: Figure 4.23(a), a = 1, b = 0.
4.14CMOS switch models, IV. Draw the switch models (using open and
closed switches in place of the transistors) for the following diagram
and input: Figure 4.23(b), a = 1, b = 0, c = 1.
4.15Resistance and capacitance, I. For both 130 nm and 28 nm
technologies, calculate the resistance and gate capacitance of an NFET
with W = 20Lmin. What are the width and gate capacitance of a PFET
with half the resistance of the W = 20Lmin NFET? Assume all
transistors have L = Lmin.
4.16Resistance and capacitance, II. For both 130 nm and 28 nm
technologies, calculate the resistance and gate capacitance of a PFET
with W = 40Lmin. What are the width and gate capacitance of an NFET
with twice the resistance of the W = 40Lmin PFET? Assume all
transistors have L = Lmin.
4.17Scaling throughput. You are designing a logic module that has an area
of 
  It does one unit of work every 400(1 + KP)τn seconds.
Use Table 4.1 for all scaling parameters.

--- Page 135 ---
(a) How many modules can you place on a1mm2 chip in both 130 nm
and 28 nm technologies?
(b) What is the time taken for one module to do one unit of work
(latency) in both 130 nm and 28 nm technologies?
(c) Using both 130 nm and 28 nm technologies, what is the total
amount of work we can do on one chip in one second
(throughput)?
4.18Simple gates, I. Draw the transistor implementation for a three-input
NAND gate.
4.19Simple gates, II. Draw the transistor implementation for a four-input
NOR gate.
4.20CMOS schematics, I. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for a
restoring logic gate that implements the function f = a ∧  (b ∨  c).
4.21CMOS schematics, II. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for a
restoring logic gate that implements the function f = ((a ∧  b) ∨  c) ∨  (d
∧  e).
4.22CMOS schematics, III. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for
a restoring logic gate that implements the function
 Assume that all inputs and their complements
are available.
4.23CMOS schematics, IV. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for a
restoring logic gate that implements the function f = 0 if and only if
cba = 010, 011, 101, or 111. Assume that all inputs and their
complements are available.
4.24CMOS schematics, V. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for a
restoring logic gate that implements the XOR gate of Figure 4.23(c).
Assume that all inputs and their complements are available.
4.25CMOS schematics, VI. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for a
restoring logic gate that implements a five-input majority-invert
function. Assume that all inputs and their complements are available.
4.26CMOS schematics, VII. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for
a restoring logic gate that implements the function f = 1ifcba = 001,
010, 011, or 101 (Fibonacci numbers). Assume that all inputs and their
complements are available.
4.27CMOS schematics, VIII. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for
a restoring logic gate that implements the function f = 0 if zero or two

--- Page 136 ---
of inputs cba are true. Assume that all inputs and their complements
are available.
4.28CMOS schematics, IX. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for a
restoring logic gate that implements the function f = 1 if one or two of
inputs cba are true. Assume that all inputs and their complements are
available.
4.29CMOS schematics, X. Draw a schematic using NFETs and PFETs for a
restoring logic gate that implements the function f = 0ifdcba = 0010,
0011, 0101, 0111, 1011, 1101 (four-bit prime numbers). Assume that
all inputs and their complements are available.
4.30CMOS to logical equation, I. Write down the logic function
implemented by the CMOS circuit of Figure 4.28(a).
Figure 4.28. CMOS circuits for Exercises 4.30, 4.31, and 4.32. You may assume that the NFET and
PFET blocks are implemented correctly.
4.31CMOS to logical equation, II. Write down the logic function
implemented by the CMOS circuit of Figure 4.28(b).
4.32CMOS to logical equation, III. Write down the logic function
implemented by the CMOS circuit of Figure 4.28(c).
4.33Tri-state buffers. Describe two static implementations of the logic
performed by four connected tri-state inverters, as in Figure 4.25(c).
Your first description should be for a single gate, while the second
includes multiple gates.

--- Page 137 ---
1 Recall from Chapter 3 that ∧  denotes the logical AND of two variables and ∨  denotes the logical
OR of two variables.
2 Electricians call these three-terminal, two-switch units three-way switches.
3 Electricians call this four-terminal, four-switch unit, where the connections are straight through
when the variable is false (switch handle down) and crossed when the variable is true (switch
handle up), a four-way switch. To control one light with n ≥ 2 switches requires two three-way
switches and n − 2 four-way switches. Of course, one can always use a four-way switch as a three-
way switch by leaving one terminal unconnected.
4 The substrate is a fourth terminal that we will ignore at present.
5 Some very advanced processes are moving back to metal gates.
6 The gate oxide thickness is also a critical dimension, but it is set by the process and cannot be
varied by the designer. In contrast, W and L are determined by the mask set, and hence can be
adjusted by the designer.
7 A detailed discussion of MOSFET operation is far beyond the scope of this book. Consult a
textbook on semiconductor devices for more details.
8 Physically the source and drain are identical, and the distinction is a matter of voltage. The source
of an NFET (PFET) is the most negative (positive) of the two non-gate terminals.
9 In reality, there is capacitance on the source and drain nodes as well – usually each has a
capacitance equal to about half of the gate capacitance (depending on device size and geometry).
For the purposes of this book, however, we’ll lump all of the capacitance on the gate node.
10 For device scaling projections and information, consult the International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors.
11 Such circuits can be used with care in isolated areas, but must be followed by a restoring stage
before a long wire or another non-restoring gate. In most cases it is better to steer clear of such
shortcut gates.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 138 ---
5
Delay and power of CMOS circuits
The specification for a digital system typically includes not only its
function, but also the delay and power (or energy) of the system. For
example, a specification for an adder describes (i) the function, that the
output is to be the sum of the two inputs; (ii) the delay, that the output
must be valid within 1 ns after the inputs are stable; and (iii) its energy,
that each add consumes no more than 2 pJ. In this chapter we shall derive
simple methods to estimate the delay and power of CMOS logic circuits.
5.1 DELAY OF STATIC CMOS GATES
As illustrated in Figure 5.1, the delay of a logic gate, tp, is the time from
when the input of the gate crosses the 50% point between V0 and V1 to when
the output of the gate crosses the same point. Specifying delay in this
manner allows us to compute the delay of a chain of logic gates by simply
summing the delays of the individual gates. For example, in Figure 5.1 the
delay from a to c is the sum of the delay of the two gates. The 50% point on
the output of the first inverter is also the 50% point on the input of the
second inverter.

--- Page 139 ---
Figure 5.1. We measure delay from the 50% point of an input transition to the 50% point of an output
transition. This figure shows the waveforms on input a and output bN, with the falling and rising
propagation delays, tpf and tpr, labeled.
Because the resistance of the PFET pull-up network may be different than
that of the NFET pull-down network, a CMOS gate may have a rising delay
that is different from its falling delay. When the two delays differ, we denote
the rising delay, the delay from a falling input to a rising output, as tpr and
the falling delay as tpf, as shown in Figure 5.1.
We can use the simple switch model derived in >Section 4.2 to estimate
tpr and tpf by calculating the RC time constant of the circuit formed by the
output resistance of the driving gate and the input capacitance of its load(s).1
Because this time constant depends in equal parts on the driving and
receiving gates, we cannot specify the delay of a gate by itself, but only as a
function of output load.
Consider, for example, a CMOS inverter with a pull-up of width WP and a
pulldown of width WN driving an identical inverter, as shown in Figures
5.2(a) and (b).2 For both rising and falling edges, the input capacitance of the
second inverter is the sum of the capacitance of the PFET and NFET: Cinv =
(WP + WN)CG. When the output of the first inverter rises, the output
resistance is that of the PFET with width WP, as shown in Figure 5.2(c): RP
= KRP/WP = KPKRN/WP. Thus for a rising edge we have

--- Page 140 ---
Figure 5.2. Delay of an inverter driving an identical inverter. (a) Logic diagram (all numbers are
device widths). (b) Transistor-level circuit. (c) Switch-level model to compute rising delay. (d) Switch-
level model for falling delay.
(5.1)
Similarly, for a falling edge, the output resistance is the resistance of the
NFET pull-down, as shown in Figure 5.2(d): RN = KRN/WN. This gives a
falling delay of
(5.2)
Most of the time we wish to size CMOS gates so that the rise and fall
delays are equal; that is, so tpr = tpf. For an inverter, this implies that WP =
KPWN, as shown in Figure 5.3. We make the PFET KP times wider than the
NFET to account for the fact that its resistivity (per square) is KP times
larger. The PFET pull-up resistance becomes RP = KRP/WP =
(KPKRN)/(KPWN) = KRN/WN = RN. This gives equal resistance and hence
equal delay. Equivalently, substituting for WP in the formula above gives

--- Page 141 ---
(5.3)
Figure 5.3. An inverter pair with equal rise/fall delays. (a) Logic diagram (sizings reflect parameters
of Table 4.1). (b) Switch-level model of falling delay (rising delay is identical).
Note that the WN term cancels out. The delay of an inverter driving an
identical inverter, tinv, is independent of device width. As the devices are
made wider, R decreases and C increases, leaving the total delay RC
unchanged. For our model 28 nm process with KP = 1.3, this delay is 2.3τN =
2.70 ps.3
EXAMPLE 5.1 Rise and fall times
Consider the AND-OR-invert gate shown in Figure 5.4. Calculate the maximum and minimum rise
and fall times of this gate driving a FO4 (Cout = 4Cinv) inverter in terms of tinv. Assume that only a
single input changes at a time.
Figure 5.4. The AND-OR-invert gate used in Example 5.1.

--- Page 142 ---
The minimum fall time occurs on the transition from abc = 000 to 100 because this switches on the
pull-down path with only a single transistor. Into a load of 4Cinv,this givestfmin = 4tinv. The maximum
fall time occurs on the transition from 010 or 001 to 011. This turns on the pull-down path with two
NFETs. The delay is twice that of the path with a single NFET, so tfmax = 8tinv.
The minimum rise time occurs on the transition from 100 to 000; this turns on the PFET controlled
by a when both of the other PFETs are on. Hence the equivalent series resistance is RP = 1.5KRN and
into a load of 4Cinv we have trmin = 6tinv. The maximum rise time occurs on the transition from 101 to
001 (or 110 to 010). In this case, only one of the two parallel PFETs is on and we have RP = 2KRN,
giving trmax = 8tinv.
5.2 FAN-OUT AND DRIVING LARGE LOADS
Consider the case where a single inverter of size 1 (WN = Wmin) sized for
equal rise/fall delay (WP = KPWN) drives four identical inverters as shown in
Figure 5.5(a). The equivalent circuit for calculating the RC time constant is
shown in Figure 5.5(c). Compared with the situation with identical inverters
(fan-out of 1), this fan-out-of-4 situation has the same driving resistance, RN,
but four times the load capacitance, 4Cinv. The result is that the delay for a
fan-out of four is four times the delay of the fan-out of one circuit. In
general, the delay for a fan-out of F is F times the delay of a fan-out of one
circuit:
tF = Ftinv. (5.4)


--- Page 143 ---
Figure 5.5. An inverter driving four times its own load: (a) driving four other inverters; (b) driving
one large (4×) inverter. (c) Switch-level model of falling delay.
For the case where F = 4wehavet4 = 4tinv = 10.8 ps. This fan-out-of-4 (FO4)
number is often used to compare processes, and designers often refer to their
cycle time and the depth of their logic in terms of FO4 delays (t4).
The delay is the same if the unit-sized inverter drives a single inverter that
is sized four times larger, as shown in Figure 5.5(b). The load capacitance on
the first inverter is still four times its input capacitance.
When we have a very large fan-out, it is advantageous to increase the
drive of a signal in stages rather than all at once. This gives a delay that is
logarithmic, rather than linear in the size of the fan-out. Consider the
situation shown in Figure 5.6(a). Signal bN, generated by a unit-sized
inverter,4 must drive a load that is 1024 times larger than a unit-sized
inverter (a fan-out of F = 1024). If we simply connect bN to xN with a wire,
the delay will be 1024tinv. If we increase the drive in stages, as shown in
Figure 5.6(b), however, we have a circuit with five stages. Each stage has a
fan-out of 4, giving a much smaller total delay of 20tinv.
Figure 5.6. Driving a large capacitive load. (a) The output of a unit-sized inverter needs to drive a fan-
out of 1024. We need a circuit to buffer up the signal bN to drive this large capacitance. (b) Minimum
delay is achieved by using a chain of inverters that increases the drive by the same factor (in this case
4) at each stage.
In general, if we divide a fan-out of F into n fan-outs of α = F1/n stages,
our delay will be given by
tFn = nF1/ntinv = αtinv logα F. (5.5)

--- Page 144 ---
We can solve for the minimum delay by taking the derivative of Equation
(5.5) with respect to n (or α) and setting this derivative to zero. Solving
shows that the minimum delay occurs for a fan-out per stage of α = e. In
practice, fan-outs between 3 and 6 give good results. Fan-outs much smaller
than 3 result in too many stages, while fan-outs larger than 6 give too much
delay per stage. A fan-out of 4 is often used in practice. Overall, driving a
large fan-out, F, using multiple stages with a fan-out of α reduces the delay
from one that increases linearly with F to one that increases logarithmically
with F –aslogα F.
EXAMPLE 5.2 Fan-out
Calculate the delay required for a minimum-sized inverter to drive a load of 125Cinv using a fan-out of
5 at each stage.
We use three stages with the minimum-sized inverter driving a 5× inverter, which drives a 25×
inverter, which drives the load. The delay of each stage is 5tinv for a total of 15tinv.
5.3 FAN-IN AND LOGICAL EFFORT
Just as fan-out increases delay by increasing load capacitance, fan-in
increases the delay of a gate by increasing output resistance – or equivalently
input capacitance. To keep the output drive constant, we size the transistors
of a multi-input gate so that the pull-up series resistance and the pull-down
series resistance are equal to the resistance of an equal rise/fall inverter with
the same relative size.
For example, consider a two-input NAND gate driving an identical
NAND gate as shown in Figure 5.7(a). We size the devices of each NAND
gate so the pull-up and pull-down networks have the same output resistance
as a unit-drive (equal rise/fall) inverter, as shown in Figure 5.7(b). Since in
the worst case only a single pull-up PFET is on, we size these PFETS WP =
KP, just as in the inverter. We get no credit for the parallel combination of
PFETs since both are on in only one of the three input states where the
output is high (both inputs zero). To give a pull-down resistance equal to RN,
each NFET in the series chain is sized at twice the minimum width. As
shown in Figure 5.7(c) putting these two RN/2 devices in series gives a total

--- Page 145 ---
pull-down resistance of RN. The capacitance of each input of this unit-drive
NAND gate is the sum of the PFET and NFET capacitance:
Figure 5.7. (a) A NAND gate driving an identical NAND gate. Both are sized for equal rise and fall
delays. (b) Transistor-level schematic. (c) Switch-level model.
We refer to this increase in input capacitance for the same output drive as
the logical effort of the two-input NAND gate. It represents the effort (in
additional charge that must be moved compared with an inverter) to perform
the two-input NAND logic function. The delay of a gate driving an identical
gate (as in Figure 5.7(a)) is the product of its logical effort and tinv.
In general, for a NAND gate with fan-in F, we size the PFETsKP and the
NFETs F giving an input capacitance of
(5.6)
and hence a logical effort of
(5.7)

--- Page 146 ---
and a delay, driving an identical NAND gate, of
(5.8)
With a NOR gate, the NFETs are in parallel, so a unit-drive NOR gate has
NFET pull-downs of size 1. In the NOR, the PFETs are in series, so a unit-
drive NOR with a fan-in of F has PFET pull-ups of size FWP. This gives a
total input capacitance of
(5.9)
and hence a logical effort of
(5.10)
For reference, Table 5.1 gives the logical effort as a function of fan-in, F,
for NAND and NOR gates with one to five inputs both as functions of KP
and numerically for KP = 1.3 (the value for our 28 nm process).
Table 5.1. Logical effort as a function of fan-in for NAND and NOR gates (ignoring source/drain
capacitance)
Fan-in
(F)
Logical effort
f(KP) KP = 1.3
NAND NOR NAND NOR
1   1   1 1.00 1.00
2
 1.43 1.56
3
 1.87 2.13

--- Page 147 ---
4
 2.30 2.70
5
 2.74 3.26
We follow a similar process to compute the logical effort of a complex
gate. Figure 5.8 shows a three-input AND-OR-invert (AOI) gate sized to
match the drive strength of a minimum inverter. The input capacitance is not
the same for all three inputs, and the logical effort must be calculated
individually. First, for a:
(5.11)
(5.12)
and next for the b and c inputs:
(5.13)
(5.14)


--- Page 148 ---
Figure 5.8. Logical effort of an AND-OR-invert (AOI) gate. (a) Gate symbol. (b) Transistor-level
schematic showing devices sized for equal rise/fall delays with unit drive.
EXAMPLE 5.3 Logical effort
Calculate the logical effort of the 2–2 OR-AND-Invert gate shown in Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9. A minimum-sized AND-OR-invert gate.
The input capacitance of this gate on each input is given by
COAI = 2 + 2KP.
Thus the logical effort is
5.4 DELAY CALCULATION
The delay of each stage i of a logic circuit is the product of its fan-out or
electrical effort from stage i to stage i + 1 and the logical effort of stage i +
1. The fan-out is the ratio of the drive of stage i to stage i + 1. The logical
effort is the capacitance multiplier applied to the input of stage i + 1 to
implement the logical function of that stage.
For example, consider the logic circuit shown in Figure 5.10. We calculate
the delay from a to e one stage at a time, as shown in Table 5.2. The first

--- Page 149 ---
stage, which drives signal bN, has a fan-out of 4, and the logical effort of the
following stage (an inverter) is 1. The total delay of this stage is 4tinv. The
second stage, driving signal c, has a fan-out of 1, since both this stage and
the next have a drive of 4. Signal c drives a three-input NOR gate which has
a logical effort of 2.13, so the total delay of this stage is 2.13. The third
stage, driving signal dN, has both fan-out and logical effort. The fan-out of
this stage is 2 (four driving eight), and the logical effort is that of the two-
input NAND, 1.43, for a total delay of 2 × 1.43 = 2.86. Finally the fourth
stage, driving signal e, has a fan-out of 4 and logical effort of 1. We do not
compute the delay of the final inverter (with drive 32). It is shown simply to
provide the load on signal e. The total delay is determined by summing the
delays of the four stages tpae = (4 + 2.13 + 2.86 + 4)tinv = 13.0tinv = 35 ps.
Figure 5.10. Logic circuit for an example delay calculation. The number under each gate is its output
drive (conductance) relative to a minimum-sized inverter with equal rise/fall delays.
Table 5.2. Computing the delay of a logic circuit
For each stage along the path, we compute the fan-out of the signal and the logical effort of the gate
receiving the signal. Multiplying the fan-out by the logical effort gives the delay per stage. Summing
over the stages gives the total delay, normalized with respect to tinv.
Driver Signal Fan-out Logical effort Delay
i i to i + 1 i to i + 1 i + 1 i to i + 1
1 bN 4.00 1.00 4.00
2 c 1.00 2.13 2.13
3 dN 2.00 1.43 2.86
4 e 4.00 1 4.00
Total 13.0
When we are computing the maximum delay of a circuit with fan-in, we
need to determine the longest (or critical) path. We do so by calculating the
delay along each path (as shown in Table 5.2), and taking the maximum
value. For example, in Figure 5.11 suppose input signals a and p change at
the same time, t = 0. The delay calculations are shown in Table 5.3. The
delay from a to c is 7.73tinv, while the delay from p to qN is 1.87tinv. Thus,

--- Page 150 ---
when calculating maximum delay, the critical path is from a to c to dN – a
total delay of 15.73tinv. If we are concerned with the minimum delay of the
circuit, then we use the path from p to qN to dN – with total delay 9.87tinv.
Figure 5.11. Logic circuit with fan-in. Inputs a and p change at the same time. The critical path for
maximum delay is the path from a to c to dN.
Table 5.3. Delay calculation for both paths of Figure 5.11
Signal Fan-out Logical effort Delay
i to i + 1 i to i + 1 i + 1 i to i + 1
bN 0.25 1   0.25
c 4 1.87   7.48
Subtotal a to c   7.73
qN 1 1.87   1.87
Subtotal p to qN   1.87
dN 8 1   8
Total a to dN 15.73
Total p to dN   9.87
Some logic circuits include fan-out to different gate types, as shown for
signal g in Figure 5.12. In this case, we compute the electrical and logical
effort for each fan-out for each driven gate. Summing these products gives
the total delay of signal g. The upper NAND gate has a fan-out of 3 with a
logical effort of 1.87 for a total effort of 5.61. The lower NOR gate has a
fan-out of 2 and a logical effort of 1.56 for a total effort of 3.12. Thus, the
total delay (or effort) of signal g is 8.73tinv.


--- Page 151 ---
Figure 5.12. Logic circuit with fan-out to different gate types. The total effort of signal g is calculated
by summing the product of fan-out and logic effort across all receiving gates.
EXAMPLE 5.4 Delay calculation
Calculate the delay of the logic circuit shown in Figure 5.13, which is one slice of the 6:64 decoder of
Figure 8.5. The circuit drives a load of 256Cinv. The fan-out of each stage is shown. Signal b drives
both the 2× inverter and two copies of the two-input NOR gate P. Signal c drives a total of two copies
of P; d drives 16 copies of Q. The logical effort of the two-input NOR P and the three-input NAND Q
are as given in Table 5.4.
Figure 5.13. Circuit used for calculating delay in Example 5.4.
Table 5.4. Delay calculation for the circuit shown in Figure 5.13
Signal Drive Load (Cinv) Delay (tinv)
b   2× 2 + 2 × 1.56 × 8 = 27.0 13.5
c   2× 2 × 1.56 × 8 = 25.0 12.5
d   8× 16 × 1.87 × 4 = 120 15.0
e   4× 32   8
f 32× 256   8
Total 57.0
The delay calculation is shown in the table below. For each stage we calculate the load by summing
the product of the fan-out, logical effort, and size of each type of gate in the next stage. The delay, in
units of tinv is then the load divided by the drive.
5.5 OPTIMIZING DELAY

--- Page 152 ---
To minimize the delay of a logic circuit we size the stages so that there is an
equal amount of delay per stage. For a single n-stage path, a simple way to
perform this optimization is to compute the total effort along the path, TE,
and then divide this effort evenly across the stages by sizing each stage to
have a total effort (product of fan-out and logical effort) of TE1/n.
Consider, for example, the circuit of Figure 5.14. The delay calculation for
this circuit is shown in Table 5.5. The ratio of the first and last gates
specifies the total amount of fan-out required, 96. We multiply this electrical
effort by the logical effort of stages 3 and 4, 1.43 and 1.87, respectively, to
give the total effort of 257. We then take 2571/4 ≈ 4 as the total effort (or
delay) per stage. The electrical effort of the gate is found by dividing this
stage effort of 4 by the logical effort. Thus, the gate sizes are x = 4, y = 4 ×
4/1.43 = 11.2, and z = 24.0. This gives a total delay of just over 16tinv.
Figure 5.14. Unsized logic circuit. The sizes x, y, and z of the three middle stages must be chosen to
minimize delay by equalizing the delay of each stage and adding stages, if needed.
Table 5.5. Optimizing gate sizes to minimize delay, the total effort is determined and divided
evenly across the stages
Driver Signal Fan-out Logical effort Size Delay
i i to i + 1 i to i + 1 i + 1 i i to i + 1
1 bN 4.00 1.00   1 x = 4
2 c 2.80 1.43   4 1.43y/x = 4
3 dN 2.14 1.87 11.2 1.87z/y = 4
4 e 4 1 24.0 96/z = 4
Total 16
Suppose the final inverter in Figure 5.14 was sized with a drive of 2048
rather than 96. In that case the total effort is TE = 2048 × 1.43 × 1.87 ≈ 5477.
If we attempt to divide this into four stages, we would get a delay of 54771/4
= 8.6tinv per stage, which is a bit high, giving a total delay of about 34.4tinv.
In this case, we can reduce the delay by adding an even number of inverter
stages, as in the example of Figure 5.6. The optimum number of stages is ln

--- Page 153 ---
5477 ≈ 8. With eight stages, each stage must have an effort of 2.93, giving a
total delay of 23.4tinv. A compromise circuit is to aim for a delay of four per
stage, which requires log4 5477 ≈ 6 stages for a total delay of 25.2tinv.
If we are to add either two or four inverters to the circuit of Figure 5.14
we must decide where to add them. We could insert a pair of inverters at any
stage of the circuit without changing its function or delay. We could even
insert individual inverters at arbitrary points if we are willing to convert the
NANDs to NORs (which is generally a bad idea because it increases total
effort.) However, it is usually best to place the extra stages last to avoid the
extra power that would otherwise be consumed if the high logical effort
stages were sized larger. However, if one of the signals has a large wire load,
it may be advantageous to insert one or more of the extra stages before that
point to ensure adequate drive for the wire.
In our discussion of delay optimization, we have omitted the self (or
parasitic) capacitance of logic gates. Adding it to our model would have two
impacts, aside from increasing the delay of each gate. First, the optimal stage
effort becomes 3–4 instead of e as adding stages becomes more expensive.
Second, large fan-in gates lead to unfeasibly large gate delays. For example,
a 64-input NAND gate would have 65 transistors attached to the output
node. Do not build high fan-in gates.
EXAMPLE 5.5 Optimizing delay
Resize the gates of Example 5.4 to give minimum delay. The input inverters, driving signals b and c,
must remain 2×.
Starting at point c, we calculate the total effort assuming unit-sized gates by multiplying the gate
fan-out (the number of driven gates) of each stage by the logical effort of the following stage.
From Table 5.6, we see that the total effort due to fan-out and logical effort is 3.12 × 29.9 = 93.4.
Multipying this by the increase in load of 128 gives a total effort of 11.9 × 103. Dividing this effort
evenly across the four stages gives an effort per stage of (11.9 × 103)1/4 = 10.5.
Table 5.6. The effort calculation for each stage of the circuit shown in Figure 5.13
Signal Gate fan-out Logical effort Effort
c   2 1.56   3.12
d 16 1.87 29.9
e   1 1   1
f   1 1   1

--- Page 154 ---
Thus, we resize the gates to give a total effort per stage of 10.5. The resulting sizes and delays are
shown in Table 5.7. We reduce the delay from that calculated in Example 5.4 by 3.7tinv.
Table 5.7. Optimized size and delays for each gate in Figure 5.13
Signal Size Effort Delay
b   2 11.5
c   2   3.12 10.5
d   6.73 29.9 10.5
e   2.36   1 10.5
f 24.8   1 10.3
Total 53.3
5.6 WIRE DELAY
On modern integrated circuits a large fraction of delay and power is due to
driving the wires that connect gates. An on-chip wire has both resistance and
capacitance, with typical values for 130 nm and 28 nm processes shown in
Table 5.8. Our examples below assume minimum-sized wires, and we ask
you to explore the impacts of larger, less resistant wires, in Exercise 5.20c.
Table 5.8. Resistance and capacitance of minimum-sized wires in 130 nm and 28 nm processes
Parameter 130 nm value 28 nm value Units Description
Rw 0.25   0.45 Ω/square resistance per square
ww 0.25   0.045 μm wire width
Rw 1 10 Ω/μm resistance per μm
Cw 0.2   0.18 fF/μm capacitance per μm
τw 0.2   1.8 fs/μm2 RC time constant
Wires that are short enough that their total resistance is small compared
with the output resistance of the driving gate can be modeled as a lumped
capacitance. For example, a minimum-sized (WN = 8Lmin) inverter has an
output resistance of 5.25 kΩ. A wire of less than 105 μm in length has a total

--- Page 155 ---
resistance of less than one-fifth this amount and can be considered a lumped
capacitance. A wire of exactly 105 μm, for example, can be modeled as a
capacitance of 19 fF, the equivalent of a fan-out of 36 compared with the
0.52 fF input capacitance of the minimum-sized inverter.
For larger drivers, shorter wires have a resistance that is comparable to the
driver output resistance. For a 16× minimum-sized inverter with an output
resistance of 328 Ω, for example, a wire of length 33 μm has a resistance
equal to the output resistance of the driver and one must get down to a length
of 6.1 μm for the resistance to be less than one-fifth of the driver resistance.
For wires that are long enough for their resistance to be significant
compared with the resistance of their driver, the delay of the wire increases
quadratically with wire length. As illustrated in Figure 5.15(a), as the wire
gets longer both the resistance and the capacitance of the wire increase
linearly, causing the RC time constant to increase quadratically. Increasing
the size of the driver as shown in Figure 5.15(b) does not improve the
situation because the total resistance is dominated by the wire resistance.
Figure 5.15. (a) A long on-chip wire has significant series resistance Rw and parallel capacitance Cw,
giving it a delay that grows quadratically with length. (b) Driving a long wire often gives unacceptable
delay and rise time. Increasing the size X of the driver does not help due to the resistivity of the line.
(c) The delay of the line can be made linear, rather than quadratic, with length by inserting repeaters of
size S at a fixed interval in the line.
We can calculate the resistance, capacitance, and intrinsic delay of a 1 mm
minimum-sized wire as follows. When modeling distributed capacitances
and resistances, like wires, the delay is not RC, but rather 0.4RC. (We ignore
output capacitance in our calculations.) So

--- Page 156 ---
Rw,1mm = RwL = (10)(103) = 10 kΩ, (5.15)
Cw,1mm = CwL = (0.18 × 10−15)(103) = 0.18 pF, (5.16)
D = 0.4RC = 0.4(Rw,1mm)(Cw,1mm) = 720 ps. (5.17)
To make the delay of a long wire linear (rather than quadratic) with
length, the wire can be divided into sections, with each section driven by a
repeater as shown in Figure 5.15(c).
To give a linear delay, we separate a wire of length L into n sections of
length l = L/n. At the end of each section, we insert an inverter (or repeater)
to drive the next segment. We make the approximation that the total delay is
the sum of three RC delays: the wire itself, the wire capacitance passing
through the driver resistance, and the next driver’s capacitance through both
the wire and driver resistance.5 We show this model in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16. (a) Schematic of one wire segment being driven and terminated by repeaters of size S. (b)
The delay modeling we use is the sum of three delays: the intrinsic wire delay (d1), the discharge of
the wire capacitance through the driving resistor (d2), and the discharge of subsequent driver’s gate
through both the driver and the wire (d3).
Dl = 0.4Rw,lCw,l + RrCw,l + Cr(Rw,l + Rr), (5.18)
(5.19)

--- Page 157 ---
We can use Equation (5.19) to derive the repeater spacing that gives minimal
delay by taking the derivative of the segment length and setting it to 0:
(5.20)
(5.21)
In Figure 5.17(a), we show how the delay of a line varies with the repeater
spacing. At very short distances, the delay of the repeaters dominate. Once
past about 60 μm, the delay begins to increase. An 8× increase in repeater
spacing, for example, causes a 2× increase in delay. We can also follow a
similar procedure to find the optimal repeater size, S. So
(5.22)
(5.23)
(5.24)
DL,1mm = 228 ps. (5.25)

--- Page 158 ---
Figure 5.17. (a) The delay of a 1 mm wire as a function of the distance between two repeaters. (b) The
delay of a 1 mm wire as a function of the size of the optimally spaced repeaters. The non-repeated
delay is 720 ps for 1 mm.
We see that, independently of the segment length, the optimal driver size
is 13.5× that of a minimum inverter. The relationship between driver size
and delay, Figure 5.17(b), is nearly flat. Once drivers pass a certain size
threshold, they have minimal impact on delay. Large drivers, however, do
increase energy consumption.
EXAMPLE 5.6 Wire delay
Compute the delay of a 1 mm minimum-width wire in 28 nm technology that is divided into four
segments, each driven by a 10× minimum-size inverter. Use the values from Tables 5.8 and 4.1.
We calculate the resistance and capacitance of a wire segment and a repeater as follows. A
minimum-sized inverter has WN = 8Lmin, so our 10× inverter has WN = 80Lmin. Then

--- Page 159 ---
Using Equation (5.18), we compute the delay of each segment as follows:
The largest contributer to delay in this example is the wire delay itself.
The delay of the entire wire, four segments, is 4Dl = (4)(84.2) = 337 ps.
5.7 POWER DISSIPATION IN CMOS
CIRCUITS
Many digital designs are constrained by energy, power, or both. The energy
usage of a circuit (measured in joules) has a direct impact on battery life in
mobile devices or the cost of supplying electricity to a system. The power
(watts, or joules per second) is related to the heat a circuit generates – and
thus the cooling system necessary. Improperly cooled chips can be
permanently damaged by high temperatures. It is important for the digital
designer to understand how to calculate and optimize both energy and
power.
5.7.1Dynamic power
In a CMOS chip, most of the energy dissipation is due to charging and
discharging the capacitance of gates and wires. The energy consumed in

--- Page 160 ---
charging a capacitor from V0 to V1 and then discharging it again to V0
through a resistor is given by
E = CV2. (5.26)
For our 28 nm process, with Cinv = 0.6 fF and V=V1 − V0 = 0.9 V, Einv = 0.49
fJ. That is, charging and discharging the gate of a minimum-sized inverter
consumes half a femtojoule.
As an example, we will compute the energy dissipated by the circuit of
Figure 5.10 when input a cycles up and down. This input cycles all internal
nodes up to and including e. Recall that the input capacitance of each gate is
the product of its size (s), logical effort (LE), and Cinv. Thus
Circuits are typically designed so that each stage of logic has equal delay.
As the preceding worked example showed, however, energy consumption is
dominated by the largest gates in a chain.
The power (P = E/T = Ef ) consumed in charging and discharging
capacitance depends on the signal transition frequency. For a circuit with
capacitance C that operates at a frequency f and has α transitions each
cycle,6 the power consumed is given by
P = 0.5CV 2fα. (5.27)

--- Page 161 ---
The factor of 0.5 is due to the fact that half of the energy is consumed on the
charging transition and the other half on the discharge. For an inverter with
activity factor α = 0.33 and a clock rate of f = 2 GHz, P = 162 nW.
To reduce the power dissipated by a circuit we can reduce any of the terms
of Equation (5.27). If we reduce voltage, power reduces quadratically.
However, the circuit also operates slower at a lower voltage. For this reason
we often reduce V and f together, getting a factor of 8 reduction in power
each time we halve V and f. Reducing capacitance is typically accomplished
by making our circuit as physically small as possible – minimizing wire
length, and hence wire capacitance.
The activity factor, α, can be reduced through a number of measures. First,
it is important that the circuit does not make unnecessary transitions. For a
combinational circuit, each transition of the inputs should result in at most
one transition of each output. Glitches or hazards (see Section 6.10) should
be eliminated because they result in unnecessary power dissipation. The
activity factor can also be reduced by gating (stopping) the clock to unused
portions of the circuit, so that these unused portions have no activity at all.
For example, if an adder is not being used on a particular cycle, stopping the
clock to the adder prevents the adder’s inputs and combinational logic from
toggling, saving considerable power.
5.7.2Static power
Up to now we have focused on dynamic power – the power due to charging
and discharging capacitors. As gate lengths and supply voltages have shrunk,
however, static leakage power has become an increasingly important factor.
Leakage current is the current that flows through a MOSFET when it is in
the off state (VGS = 0, VDS = VDD) and is proportional to e−VT. Thus, as
threshold voltage decreases, leakage current increases exponentially. The
slope of this curve is often referred to as the subthreshold slope and is
typically about 70 mV/dec. That is, for each 70 mV decrease in threshold
voltage, leakage current increases by 10×. The scaling of supply voltage has
largely stopped because lower supply voltages require lower threshold
voltages, resulting in higher leakage current.
Static power can be reduced by using transistors with a higher VT. These
transistors come at the expense of lower speed or a higher supply voltage
(dynamic energy) or both. Many digital designs use low-VT transistors on

--- Page 162 ---
critical paths and high-VT transistors everywhere else. Another way of
eliminating leakage current is to turn off or power-gate circuits. Power-
gating is done at a coarse granularity in both space and time because it takes
significant time and control logic to cycle between on and off states.
Consider a process that is tailored for high-speed applications, with a
supply voltage of 0.9 V and a leakage current of 100 nA/μm. This means that
every minimum-sized transistor (W = 224 nm) burns about 20 nW of power
(P = IV). Remember that commercial chips can have the equivalent of one to
two billion minimum inverters, making chip-wide leakage power 20–40 W.
This is a significant portion of these chips’ 60–120 W power budgets.
5.7.3Power scaling
The capacitance of a CMOS transistor scales with L. This is because all three
dimensions of the parallel-plate capacitor scale linearly with L and C =
LW/H. For a constant supply voltage, the energy of any given logic module
also scales with L. The energy density of the chip thus increases as 1/L; i.e.,
if we halve L, we double the energy consumed per unit area. Even at
constant frequency, the power density increases as 1/L, quickly outstripping
our ability to cool the chip. The problem gets worse when we attempt to
increase performance by increasing the frequency, causing power density to
grow as 1/L2. Many designers now turn to parallelism, running more
modules slower, to increase performance. Parallelism is a more energy-
efficient approach to performance.
EXAMPLE 5.7 Energy calculation
Compute the dynamic energy dissipated by the circuit of Figure 5.14 with x = 4, y = 12, and z = 24
when signal a goes through a full cycle from 0 to 1 and back to 0. Assume that the transitions on a
propagate all the way to e. You may ignore wire capacitance and assume the supply voltage to be VDD
= 1V.
We compute the capacitance of each stage and sum. The dynamic energy is E = CV2, and, since V =
1, E = C. We first compute the capacitance in terms of Cinv and then convert to farads after summing
(see Table 5.9). Thus, the total capacitance is 163 × Cinv = (163)(0.515 fF) = 84 fF. Thus the dynamic
energy from cycling a is 84 fJ.
Table 5.9. Energy calculation for Example 5.7
Signal Capacitance (Cinv)
a     1

--- Page 163 ---
bN     4
c   12 × 1.43 = 17.2
dN   24 × 1.87 = 44.9
e   96
Total 163
Summary
In this chapter you have learned a simple method to estimate the delay and
power of CMOS logic circuits. While this is no substitute for detailed circuit
simulations, this method will allow you to estimate the delay and dynamic
energy of typical CMOS logic circuits with about 20% accuracy. Just as
importantly, it provides you with a means of comparing different circuit
designs and selecting the right solution.
Using the simple switch-level model of a MOSFET that we developed in
Chapter 4, we estimated the delay of a CMOS gate using a simple RC model.
The delay is the output resistance of the driving gate multiplied by the total
capacitance being driven. We see that if we drive a load directly, delay
increases linearly with the fan-out of our driver, the ratio of load capacitance
to driver input capacitance. To drive large loads more quickly, we build a
multi-stage driver increasing our driver size by a fixed multiple (typically
4×) each stage.
Increasing the complexity of a CMOS gate while holding output
resistance constant increases the input capacitance of the gate. We refer to
this increased input capacitance as the logical effort of the gate. The product
of a driving gate’s fan-out (or electrical effort) and the driven gate’s logical
effort is the total effort of a stage of logic. The delay of the stage is
proportional to this total effort. Delay is minimized when the total effort of
each stage is balanced and near an optimal total effort – approximately 4.
The resistance and capacitance of an on-chip wire both increase linearly
with length. This gives a wire delay, RC, that increases quadratically with
wire length. To make wire delay linear with length, we break the wire into
fixed-length segments and drive each segment with a repeater.
CMOS chips dissipate dynamic power, due to charging and discharging
capacitance as signals switch, and static power, due to the leakage of
transistors. The dynamic energy associated with one gate switching is E =

--- Page 164 ---
CV2. This energy is about 0.5 fJ for a typical inverter in a 28 nm process.
The dynamic power is P = 0.5Efα for frequency f and activity factor α.
Static power is largely due to subthreshold leakage current, which varies
exponentially with threshold voltage. For every 70 mV decrease in threshold
voltage, leakage current increases by 10×. By adjusting the threshold voltage
of a device, we can set the leakage current wherever we want – at a cost in
performance. Typical high-speed processes have a worst-case leakage
current that accounts for about 30% of total power, while low-leakage
processes have negligible leakage current but much slower gates.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Mead and Rem first described the exponential horn for driving large
capacitive loads in ref. [77]. Further work on CMOS delay models can be
found in ref. [50]. Both of these references use an Elmore delay model to
find the RC delay [41].
Sutherland and Sproull introduced the notion of logical effort in 1991
[104], and Sutherland, Sproull, and Harris have written a monograph
describing this concept and its application in detail [102].
Scaling, before leakage power became dominant, followed the rules laid
out by Dennard et al. [37]. Dennard’s scaling estimates that power densities
do not increase with smaller gate lengths are no longer true.
Exercises
5.1 Rise and fall times, I. Compute the maximum and minimum rise/fall
times of the gates shown in Figure 5.18(a). Assume that only one input
toggles at a time and that the gates drive an output of 4Cinv. You may
leave your answer in terms of tinv.

--- Page 165 ---
Figure 5.18. Circuits for Exercises 5.1–5.3.
5.2 Rise and fall times, II. Compute the maximum and minimum rise/fall
times of the gates shown in Figure 5.18(b). Assume that only one input
toggles at a time and that the gates drive an output of 4Cinv. You may
leave your answer in terms of tinv.
5.3 Rise and fall times, III. Compute the maximum and minimum rise/fall
times of the gates shown in Figure 5.18(c). Assume that only one input
toggles at a time and that the gates drive an output of 4Cinv. You may
leave your answer in terms of tinv.
5.4 Inverter chain delay and energy, I. Compute the delay and energy of
driving an inverter of size 256 from a minimum-size inverter (size 1)
with a series of FO2 inverters. Express your answer in terms of tinv and
Einv.
5.5 Inverter chain delay and energy, II. Compute the delay and energy of
driving an inverter of size 256 from a minimum-size inverter (size 1)
with a series of FO4 inverters. Express your answer in terms of tinv and
Einv.
5.6 Inverter chain delay and energy, III. Compute the delay and energy of
driving an inverter of size 256 from a minimum-size inverter (size 1)
with a series of FO8 inverters. Express your answer in terms of tinv and
Einv.

--- Page 166 ---
5.7 Inverter chain delay and energy, IV. Compute the delay and energy of
driving an inverter of size 256 from a minimum-size inverter (size 1)
with a series of FO16 inverters. Express your answer in terms of tinv
and Einv.
5.8 Sizing of CMOS gates, I. Consider a four-input static CMOS gate that
implements the function f = a ∧  (b ∨  (c ∧  d)).
(a)  Draw a schematic symbol for this gate with the bubble on the
output.
(b)  Draw a transistor schematic for this gate and size the transistors
for rise and fall delay equal to a minimum-sized inverter with
equal rise/fall.
(c)  Compute the logical effort of this gate for each of its inputs.
5.9 Sizing of CMOS gates, II. Repeat Exercise 5.8 for a gate that
implements the function f = (a ∧  b) ∨  (c ∧  d).
5.10Sizing of CMOS gates, III. For Figure 5.19, do the following:
(a) Draw the correct PFET network.
(b) Size each of the transistors to provide the same rise and fall
resistance as a minimum-sized inverter.
(c) Compute the logical effort for each input.
Figure 5.19. Circuit for Exercise 5.10.
5.11 Delay calculation I. Calculate the delay of the circuit in Figure 5.20 in
terms of tinv.

--- Page 167 ---
Figure 5.20. Circuit for Exercises 5.11, 5.14, and 5.22. Gate sizes are given by the numbers under
each gate.
5.12Delay calculation II. Calculate the delay of the circuit in Figure 5.21 in
terms of tinv.
Figure 5.21. Circuit for Exercises 5.12, 5.15, and 5.23. Gate sizes are given by the numbers under
each gate.
5.13Delay calculation II. Calculate the delay of the circuit in Figure 5.22
from inputs a and p to signal dN in terms of tinv.
Figure 5.22. Circuit for Exercises 5.13, 5.16, and 5.22. Gate sizes are given by the numbers under
each gate.
5.14Delay optimization I. Resize the gates in Figure 5.20 to give minimum
delay. You may not change the size of input or output gates.
5.15Delay optimization II. Resize the gates in Figure 5.21 to give minimum
delay. You may not change the size of input or output gates.
5.16Delay optimization III. Resize the gates in Figure 5.22 to give
minimum delay from a to dN. You may not change the size of input or
output gates.

--- Page 168 ---
5.17Wire delay I. Calculate the delay of a 10 mm wire in 28 nm technology
that is divided into 20 0.5 mm segments with a 20× minimum-size
inverter driving each segment.
5.18Wire delay II. Calculate the delay of a 1 mm wire in 28 nm technology
that is divided into five 200 μm segments with a 10× minimum-size
inverter driving each segment.
5.19Wire delay III. Calculate the delay of a 1 mm wire in 28 nm technology
that is divided into ten 100 μm segments with a 10× minimum-size
inverter driving each segment.
5.20Wire delay and energy, I. Use a repeater that is 13.5 times larger than
minimum in the following.
(a) Calculate the minimum time to transmit a bit across a 5 mm wire.
What is the total energy required to transmit a bit using this
circuit?
(b) If we doubled the spacing between repeaters, what are the new
delay and energy?
(c) Plot the following graphs: delay vs. segment length, energy vs.
segment length, and a scatter plot of energy vs. delay.
5.21Wire delay and energy, II. Intermediate wires that are larger than
minimum-sized wires provide a lower resistance and higher
capacitance. For example, a wire with a 3× width may have one-third
the resistance and only 2× more capacitance. Compute the optimal
repeater size, spacing, and minimum delay for this type of wire.
5.22Energy calculation I. Compute the energy consumed when input aN
cycles from 0 to 1 and back to 0 in Figure 5.20. Assume that the
transitions propagate to eN and that VDD = 1V.
5.23Energy calculation II. Compute the energy consumed when input a
cycles from 0 to 1 and back to 0 in Figure 5.21. Assume that the
transitions propagate to e but not to the output of the three-input
NAND. Also assume that VDD = 1.1 V.
5.24Energy calculation III. Compute the energy consumed when input a
cycles from 0 to 1 and back to 0 in Figure 5.22. Assume that VDD = 0.9
V. Assume that the transitions propagate to dN but that p remains at 0.
You may ignore the output load on the 7× inverter.
5.25Design for power. How does designing for power differ between a
cellular phone radio chip and a high-utilization server processor? What

--- Page 169 ---
power reduction mechanisms would you use for each? What are the
differing constraints?
1 In reality, the driving gate has output capacitance roughly equal to its input capacitance. We ignore
that capacitance here to simplify the model.
2 WP and WN are in units of Wmin = 8Lmin; CG is the capacitance of a gate with width 8Lmin,soCG =
0.22 fF.
3 For a minimum-sized WN = 8Lmin inverter, with equal rise/fall delay, Cinv = 0.5 fF in our model
process.
4 From now on, we may drop WP from our diagrams whenever gates are sized for equal rise and fall.
5 This is a very simple model that underestimates the total delay, but it gives a reasonable estimate of
the optimal repeater spacing. For more accurate and complex models, refer to refs. [8] and [29].
6 We count a signal that transitions from 0 to 1 or 1 to 0 each cycle as α = 1. A clock signal has α = 2.
Some references use an activity factor that counts full cycles rather than transitions and hence is
given by half of this amount.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 170 ---
6
Combinational logic design
Combinational logic circuits implement logical functions on a set of
inputs. Used for control, arithmetic, and data steering, combinational
circuits are the heart of digital systems. Sequential logic circuits (see
Chapter 14) use combinational circuits to generate their next state
functions.
In this chapter we introduce combinational logic circuits and describe a
procedure to design these circuits given a specification. At one time,
before the mid 1980s, such manual synthesis of combinational circuits
was a major part of digital design practice. Today, however, designers
write the specification of logic circuits in a hardware description language
(like VHDL) and the synthesis is performed automatically by a computer-
aided design (CAD) program.
We describe the manual synthesis process here because every digital
designer should understand how to generate a logic circuit from a
specification. Understanding this process allows the designer to better use
the CAD tools that perform this function in practice, and, on rare
occasions, to generate critical pieces of logic manually.
6.1 COMBINATIONAL LOGIC
As illustrated in Figure 6.1, a combinational logic circuit generates a set of
outputs whose state depends only on the current state of the inputs. Of
course, when an input changes state, some time is required for an output to
reflect this change. However, except for this delay the outputs do not reflect
the history of the circuit. With a combinational circuit, a given input state

--- Page 171 ---
will always produce the same output state regardless of the sequence of
previous input states. A circuit where the output depends on previous input
states is called a sequential circuit (see Chapter 14).
Figure 6.1. A combinational logic circuit produces a set of outputs {o1, ..., om} that depend only on
the current state of a set of inputs {i1, ..., in}. (a) Block CL is shown with n inputs and m outputs. (b)
Equivalent block with n inputs and m outputs shown as buses.
For example, a majority circuit, a logic circuit that accepts n inputs and
outputs a 1 if at least ⌊n/2+1 ⌋  of the inputs are 1, is a combinational circuit.
The output depends only on the number of 1s in the present input state.
Previous input states do not affect the output.
On the other hand, a circuit that outputs a 1 if the number of 1s in the n
inputs is greater than the previous input state is sequential (not
combinational). A given input state, e.g., ik = 011, can result in o = 1 if the
previous input was ik−1 = 010, or it can result in o = 0 if the previous input
was ik−1 = 111. Thus, the output depends not just on the present input, but
also on the history (in this case, very recent history) of previous inputs.
Combinational logic circuits are important because their static nature
makes them easy to design and analyze. As we shall see, general sequential
circuits are quite complex in comparison. In fact, to make sequential circuits
tractable we usually restrict ourselves to synchronous sequential circuits,
which use combinational logic to generate a next-state function (see Chapter
14).
Please note that logic circuits that depend only on their inputs are
combinational and not combinatorial. While these two words sound similar,
they mean different things. The word combinatorial refers to the
mathematics of counting, not to logic circuits. To keep them straight,
remember that combinational logic circuits combine their inputs to generate
an output.

--- Page 172 ---
6.2 CLOSURE
A valuable property of combinational logic circuits is that they are closed
under acyclic composition. That is, if we connect together a number of
combinational logic circuits – connecting the outputs of one to the inputs of
another – and avoid creating any loops (that would be cyclic), the result will
be a combinational logic circuit. Thus we can create large combinational
logic circuits by connecting together small combinational logic circuits.
An example of acyclic, and of cyclic, composition is shown in Figure 6.2.
A combinational circuit realized by acyclically composing two smaller
combinational circuits is shown in Figure 6.2(a). The circuit in Figure 6.2(b),
on the other hand, is not combinational. The cycle created by feeding the
output of the upper block into the input of the lower block creates a state.
The value of this feedback variable can remember the history of the circuit.
Hence the output of this circuit is not just a function of its inputs. In fact, we
shall see that flip-flops, the building blocks of most sequential logic circuits,
are built using exactly the type of feedback shown in Figure 6.2(b).
Figure 6.2. Combinational logic circuits are closed under acyclic composition. (a) This acyclic
composition of two combinational logic circuits is itself a combinational logic circuit. (b) This cyclic
composition of two combinational logic circuits is not combinational. The feedback of the cyclic
composition creates an internal state.
It is easy to prove that acyclic compositions of combinational circuits are
themselves combinational by induction, starting at the input and working
toward the output. Let a combinational block whose inputs are connected
only to primary inputs (i.e., not to the outputs of other blocks) be a rank 1
block. Similarly, let a block whose inputs are connected only to primary

--- Page 173 ---
inputs and/or to the outputs of blocks of ranks 1 through k be a rank k + 1
block. By definition, all rank 1 blocks are combinational. Then, if we assume
that all blocks of ranks 1 to k are combinational, a rank k + 1 block is also
combinational. Since its outputs depend only on the current state of its
inputs, and since all of its inputs depend only on the current state of the
primary inputs, its outputs also depend only on the current state of the
primary inputs.
6.3 TRUTH TABLES, MINTERMS, AND
NORMAL FORM
Suppose we want to build a combinational logic circuit that outputs a 1 when
its four-bit input represents a prime number in binary. One way to represent
the logic function realized by this circuit is with an English-language
description – as we have just specified it. However, we generally prefer a
more precise definition.
Often we start with a truth table that shows the output value for each input
combination. Table 6.1 shows a truth table for the four-bit prime number
function.1 For an n-input function, a truth table has 2n rows (16 in this case),
one for each input combination. Each row lists the output of the circuit for
that input combination (0 or 1 for a one-bit output).
Table 6.1. Truth table for a four-bit prime number, or 1, circuit
The column “Out” shows the output of the circuit for each of the 16 input
combinations.
No. In Out
0 0000 0
1 0001 1
2 0010 1
3 0011 1
4 0100 0
5 0101 1
6 0110 0

--- Page 174 ---
7 0111 1
8 1000 0
9 1001 0
10 1010 0
11 1011 1
12 1100 0
13 1101 1
14 1110 0
15 1111 0
Of course, it is a bit redundant to show both the 0 and 1 outputs in the
table. It suffices to show just those input combinations for which the output
is 1. Such an abbreviated table for our prime number function is shown in
Table 6.2.
Table 6.2. Abbreviated truth table for a four-bit prime number circuit
Only inputs for which the output is 1 are listed explicitly.
No. In Out
1 0001 1
2 0010 1
3 0011 1
5 0101 1
7 0111 1
11 1011 1
13 1101 1
Otherwise 0
The reduced table (Table 6.2) suggests one way to implement a logic
circuit that realizes the prime function. For each row of the table, an AND
gate is connected so that the output of the AND is true only for the input
combination shown in that row. For example, for the first row of the table,
we use an AND gate connected to realize the function f1 = d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a
(where d, c, b, and a are the four bits of in). If we repeat this process for each
row of the table, we get the complete function:

--- Page 175 ---
f = (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d
∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d ∧  c
∧  b ∧  a).
(6.1)
Figure 6.3 shows a schematic logic diagram corresponding to Equation
(6.1). The seven AND gates correspond to the seven product terms of
Equation (6.1), which in turn correspond to the seven rows of Table 6.2. The
output of each AND gate goes high when the inputs match the input values
listed in the corresponding row of the truth table. For example, the output of
the AND gate labeled 5 goes high when the inputs are 0101 (binary 5). The
AND gates feed a seven-input OR gate, which outputs high if any of the
AND gates have a high output, that is, if the input matches 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11,
or 13 – which is the desired function.
Figure 6.3. A four-bit prime number circuit in conjunctive (sum-of-products) normal form. An AND
gate generates the minterm associated with each row of the truth table that gives a true output. An OR
gate combines the minterms, giving an output that is true when the input matches any of these rows.
Each product term in Equation (6.1) is called a minterm. A minterm is a
product term that includes each input of a circuit or its complement. Each of
the terms of Equation (6.1) includes all four inputs (or their complements).
Thus they are minterms. The name minterm derives from the fact that these
four-input product terms represent a minimal (single) number of input states,
or rows of the truth table. As we shall see in Section 6.4, we can write

--- Page 176 ---
product terms that represent multiple input states – in effect combining
minterms.
We can write Equation (6.1) in shorthand as follows:
(6.2)
to indicate that the output is the sum (OR) of the minterms listed in the
parentheses. Because each minterm corresponds to a row of a truth table, a
list of minterms, as in Equation (6.2), is a list of the rows of the truth table
for which the function is true.
You will recall from Section 3.4 that expressing a logic function as a sum
of minterms is a normal form that is unique for each logic function. While
this form is unique, it is not particularly efficient. We can do much better by
combining minterms into simpler product terms that each represent multiple
lines of our truth table.
EXAMPLE 6.1 Truth tables
Draw an abbreviated truth table for a four-bit multiple of 3 function. The output of the function should
be true if the input is a multiple of 3: 3, 6, 9, 12, or 15. Also express this function as a sum of
minterms.
The abbreviated truth table, Table 6.3, simply lists the input combinations for which the output is
true. Expressing this as a sum of minterms, we write
Table 6.3. Abbreviated truth table for a multiple-of-3 function
No. In Out
3 0011 1
6 0110 1
9 1001 1
12 1100 1
15 1111 1
Otherwise 0

--- Page 177 ---
6.4 IMPLICANTS AND CUBES
An examination of Table 6.2 reveals several rows that differ in only one
position. For example, the rows 0010 and 0011 differ only in the rightmost
(least significant) position. Thus, if we allow bits of in to be X (matches
either 0 or 1), we can replace the two rows 0010 and 0011 by the single row
001X. This new row 001X corresponds to a product term that includes just
three of the four inputs (or their complements):
f001X = d ∧  c ∧  b = (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) ∨  (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a). (6.3)
The 001X product term subsumes the two minterms corresponding to 0010
and 0011 because it is true only when at least one of them is true. Thus, in a
logic function we can replace the two minterms for 0010 and 0011 with the
simpler product term for 001X without changing the function.
A product term like 001X (d ∧  c ∧  b) that is true only when a function is
true is called an implicant of the function. This is just a way of saying that
the product term implies the function. A minterm may or may not be an
implicant of a function. The minterm 0010 (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) is an implicant of
the prime function because it implies the function – when 0010 is true, the
function is true. Note that 0100 (d ∧  c ∧  b ∧  a) is also a minterm (it is a
product that includes each input or its complement), but it is not an implicant
of the prime function. When 0100 is true, the prime function is false because
4 is not a prime. If we say that a product is a minterm of a function we are
saying that it is both a minterm and an implicant of the function.
It is often useful to visualize implicants on a cube, as shown in Figure 6.4.
This figure shows a three-bit prime number function mapped onto a three-
dimensional cube. Each vertex of the cube represents a minterm. The cube
makes it easy to see which minterms and implicants can be combined into
larger implicants.2 Minterms that differ in just one variable (e.g., 001 and
011) are adjacent to each other, and the edge between two vertices (e.g.,
01X) represents the product that includes the two minterms (the OR of the
two adjacent minterms). Edges that differ in just one variable (e.g., 0X1 and
1X1) are adjacent on the cube, and the face between the edges represents the
product that includes the two edge products (e.g., XX1). In this figure, the
three-bit prime number function is shown as five bold vertices (001, 010,

--- Page 178 ---
011, 101, and 111). Five bold edges connecting these vertices represent the
five two-variable implicants of the function (X01, 0X1, 0X1, X11, and 1X1).
Finally, the shaded face (XX1) represents the single one-variable implicant
of the function.
Figure 6.4. Cube visualization of the three-bit prime number function. Each vertex corresponds to a
minterm, each edge to a product of two variables, and each face to a single variable. The bold vertices,
the bold edges, and the shaded face show implicants of the three-bit prime number function.
A cube representation of the full four-bit prime number function is shown
in Figure 6.5. Only the minterms of the function are labeled. To represent
four variables, we draw a four-dimensional cube as two three-dimensional
cubes, one within the other. As before, vertices represent minterms, edges
represent products with one X, and faces represent products with two Xs. In
four dimensions, however, we also have eight volumes that represent
products with three Xs. For example, the outside cube represents 1XXX – all
minterms where the leftmost (most significant) bit d is true. The four-bit
prime number function has seven vertices (minterms). Connecting adjacent
vertices gives seven edges (implicants with a single X). Finally, connecting
adjacent edges gives a single face (implicant with two Xs). All of these
implicants of the four-bit prime number function are shown in Table 6.4.

--- Page 179 ---
Figure 6.5. Cube visualization of the four-bit prime number function.
Table 6.4. All implicants of the four-bit prime number function; prime implicants are shown in
bold
 Number of variables
4 3 2 1
0001 001X 0XX1
0010 00X1
0011 0X01
0101 0X11
0111 01X1
1011 X011
1101 X101
Computer programs that synthesize and optimize logic functions use an
internal representation of logic functions as a set of implicants, where each
implicant is represented as a vector with elements 0, 1, or X. To simplify a
function, the first step is to generate all of the implicants of the function,
such as that shown in Table 6.4. A systematic procedure to achieve this is to
start with all minterms of the function (the “4” column of Table 6.4). For
each minterm, attempt to insert an X into each variable position. If the result
is an implicant of the function, insert it in a list of single-X implicants (the
“3” column of Table 6.4). Then, for each implicant with one X, attempt to
insert an X into each of the remaining non-X positions, and if the result is an

--- Page 180 ---
implicant, insert it in a list of two-X implicants. The process is repeated for
two-X implicants and so on, until no further implicants are generated. Such a
procedure will, given a list of minterms, generate a list of implicants.
If an implicant x has the property that replacing any 0 or 1 digit of x with
an X results in a product that is not an implicant, then we call x a prime
implicant.3 A prime implicant is an implicant that cannot be made any larger
and still be an implicant. The prime implicants of the prime number function
are shown in bold in Table 6.4.
If a prime implicant of a function, x, is the only prime implicant that
contains a particular minterm of the function y, we say that x is an essential
prime implicant; x is essential because no other prime implicant includes y.
Without x a collection of prime implicants will not include minterm y. All
four of the prime implicants of the four-bit prime number function are
essential. Implicant 0XX1 is the only prime implicant that includes 0001 and
0111. Minterm 0010 is included only in prime implicant 001X, X101 is the
only prime implicant that includes 1101, and 1011 is only included in prime
implicant X011.
EXAMPLE 6.2 Implicants
Write down all of the implicants of the following function and indicate which implicants are prime
implicants:
Table 6.5 lists the implicants. We start by writing down the six minterms that are implicants in the
far left column. We then check whether changing one bit of each of these minterms gives another
minterm that is an implicant. If it does, we enter an implicant with an X in that position in the next
column. For example, changing the LSB of 0000 gives 0001, which is also an implicant, so we put
000X in the three-variable column.
Table 6.5. The implicants and prime implicants of the function given in Example 6.2
 Number of variables
4 3 2 1
0000 000X 0X0X
0001 0X00
0100 0X01
0101 010X
0111 01X1

--- Page 181 ---
1010
We repeat the process by seeing whether complementing any non-X bit in each of the three-variable
implicants gives another three-variable implicant. If so, we enter the two-variable implicant that
covers both in the next column. For example, flipping the second bit of 000X gives 010X, which is
also an implicant, so we add 0X0X to the list of two-variable implicants. This is the only two-variable
implicant of this function.
The three prime implicants of the function are shown in bold; 1010 is a prime implicant because
changing any bit gives a minterm that is not an implicant. Thus, 1010 is not covered by any of the
three-variable implicants. Similarly, 01X1 is prime because it is not covered by 0X0X. The largest
implicant 0X0X is prime because making it any larger gives an implicant that includes minterms not
in the function.
6.5 KARNAUGH MAPS
Because it is inconvenient to draw cubes (especially in four or more
dimensions), we often use a version of a cube flattened into two dimensions
called a Karnaugh map (or K-map for short). Figure 6.6(a) shows how four-
variable minterms are arranged in a four-variable K-map. Each square of a
K-map corresponds to a minterm, and the squares of the K-map in Figure
6.6(a) are labeled with their minterm numbers. A pair of variables is assigned
to each dimension and sequenced using a Gray code so that only one
variable changes as we move from one square to another across a dimension
– including the wrap-around from the end back to the beginning. In Figure
6.6(a), for example, we assign the rightmost two bits ba of the input dcba to
the horizontal axis. As we move along this axis, these two bits (ba) take on
the values 00, 01, 11, and 10 in turn. We map the leftmost bits dc to the
vertical axis in a similar manner. Because only one variable changes from
column to column and from row to row (including wrap-arounds), two
minterms that differ in only one variable are adjacent in the K-map, just as
they are adjacent in the cube representation.

--- Page 182 ---
Figure 6.6. A Karnaugh map (K-map) for the four-bit prime number function. Inputs a and b change
along the horizontal axis, while inputs c and d change along the vertical axis. The map is arranged so
that each square is adjacent (including wrap-around) to all squares that correspond to changing exactly
one input variable. (a) The arrangement of minterms in a four-variable K-map. (b) The K-map for the
four-bit prime number function. (c) The same K-map with the four prime implicants of the function
identified. Note that implicant X011 wraps around from top to bottom.
Figure 6.6(b) shows a K-map for the four-bit prime number function. The
content of each square is either a 1, which indicates that this minterm is an
implicant of the function, or a 0, to indicate that it is not. Later we will allow
squares to contain an X to indicate that the minterm may or may not be an
implicant – i.e., it is a don’t care.
Figure 6.6(c) shows how the adjacency property of a K-map, just like the
adjacency property of a cube, makes it easy to find larger implicants. The
figure shows the prime implicants of the prime number function identified
on the K-map. The three implicants of size 2 (single X) are pairs of adjacent
1s in the map. For example, implicant X011 is the pair of 1s in the ab = 11
column that wraps from top to bottom (c = 0). An implicant of size 4
contains four 1s and may be either a square, as is the case for 0XX1, or a full
row or column, none in this function. For example, the product XX00
corresponds to the leftmost column of the K-map.
Figure 6.7 shows the arrangement of minterms for K-maps with two,
three, and five variables. The five-variable K-map consists of two four-
variable K-maps side by side. Corresponding squares of the two K-maps are
considered to be adjacent in that their minterms differ only in the value of
variable e. K-maps with up to eight variables can be handled by creating a 4
× 4 array of four-variable K-maps.

--- Page 183 ---
Figure 6.7. Position of minterms in K-maps of different sizes. (a) Two-variable K-map; (b) three-
variable K-map; (c) five-variable K-map.
EXAMPLE 6.3 Karnaugh map
Draw a Karnaugh map for the function of Example 6.2 and circle the prime implicants.
The Karnaugh map for this function is shown in Figure 6.8, with the prime implicants identified.
We draw the Karnaugh map by putting 1s in the squares corresponding to the minterms that are
implicants of the function. We identify larger implicants by combining adjacent 1s.
Figure 6.8. Karnaugh map and cover for Example 6.3, a function with minterms 0, 1, 4, 5, 7, and 10.

--- Page 184 ---
6.6 COVERING A FUNCTION
Once we have a list of implicants for a function, the problem remains how to
select the least expensive set of implicants that cover the function. A set of
implicants is a cover of a function if each minterm of the function is
included in at least one implicant of the cover. We define the cost of an
implicant as the number of variables in the product. Thus, with a four-
variable function, a minterm like 0011 has cost 4, a one-X implicant like
001X has cost 3, a two-X implicant like 0XX1 has cost 2, and so on.
A procedure to select an inexpensive set of implicants is as follows:
(1) start with an empty cover;
(2) add all essential prime implicants to the cover;
(3) for each remaining uncovered minterm, add the largest implicant that
covers that minterm to the cover.
This procedure will always result in a good cover. However, there is no
guarantee that it will give the lowest-cost cover. Depending on the order in
which minterms are covered in step (3), and the method used to select
between equal-cost implicants to cover each minterm, different covers of
possibly different cost may result.
For the four-bit prime number function, the function is completely
covered by the four essential prime implicants. Thus, the synthesis process is
done after step (2), and the cover is both minimum and unique.
Consider, however, the logic function shown in Figure 6.9(a). This
function has no essential prime implicants so our process moves to step (3)
with an empty cover. At step (3), suppose we select uncovered minterms in
numerical order. Hence we start with minterm 000. We can cover 000 with
either X00 or 0X0. Both are implicants of the function. If we choose X00,
the cover shown in Figure 6.9(b) will result. If instead we choose 0X0, we
get the cover shown in Figure 6.9(c). Both of these covers are minimal –
even if they are not unique.

--- Page 185 ---
Figure 6.9. A function with a non-unique minimum cover and no essential prime implicants. (a) K-
map of the function. (b) One cover contains X00, 1X1, and 01X. (c) A different cover contains 10X,
X11, and 0X0.
It is also possible for this procedure to generate a non-minimal cover. In
the K-map of Figure 6.9, suppose we initially select implicant X00 and then
select implicant X11. This is possible since it is one of the largest (size 2)
implicants that covers an uncovered minterm. However, if we make this
choice, we can no longer cover the function in three minterms; it will take
four minterms to complete the cover. In practice, this doesn’t matter. Logic
gates are inexpensive and, except in rare cases, no one cares whether your
cover is minimal or not.
EXAMPLE 6.4 Covering a function
Derive the minimal cover of the three-variable function
As shown on the Karnaugh map in Figure 6.10, there are three two-variable implicants 0X1, X01,
and 10X. Of these, however, only 0X1 and 10X are essential. The function is entirely covered by these
two prime implicants. Thus, we can write
f = 0X1 ∨  10X
or
f(c, b, a) = (c ∧  a) ∨  (c ∧  b).

--- Page 186 ---
Figure 6.10. K-map used to find a cover for Example 6.4.
6.7 FROM A COVER TO GATES
Once we have a minimum-cost cover of a logic function, the cover can be
directly converted to gates by instantiating an AND gate for each implicant
in the cover and using a single OR gate to sum the outputs of the AND gates.
Such an AND-OR realization of the four-bit prime number function is shown
in Figure 6.11(a).
Figure 6.11. Logic circuit for the four-bit prime number function. (a) Logic circuit using AND and OR
gates with arbitrary inversion bubbles on inputs. Each AND gate corresponds to a prime implicant in
the cover of the function. (b) Logic circuit using CMOS NAND gates and inverters. NAND gates are
used for both the AND and OR functions. Inverters complement inputs as required.
With CMOS logic we are restricted to inverting gates, so we use NAND
gates for both the AND and the OR functions as shown in Figure 6.11(b).
Because CMOS gates have all inputs of the same polarity (all bubbles or no
bubbles), we add inverters as needed to invert inputs. We could just as easily

--- Page 187 ---
have designed the function using all NOR gates; NANDs are preferred,
however, because they have lower logical effort for the same fan-in (see
Section 5.3).
CMOS gates are also restricted in their fan-in (see Section 5.3). In typical
cell libraries, the maximum fan-in of a NAND or NOR gate is 4. If a larger
fan-in is needed, a tree of gates (e.g., two NANDs into a NOR) is used to
build a large AND or OR, adding inverters as needed to correct the polarity.
6.8 INCOMPLETELY SPECIFIED FUNCTIONS
Often our specification guarantees that a certain set of input states (or
minterms) will never be used. Suppose, for example, we have been asked to
design a one-digit decimal prime number detecting circuit that need only
accept inputs in the range from 0 to 9. That is, for an input between 0 and 9
our circuit must output 1 if the number is a prime and 0 otherwise. However,
for inputs between 10 and 15 our circuit can output either 0 or 1 – the output
is unspecified.
We can simplify our logic by taking advantage of these don’t care input
states as shown in Figure 6.12. Figure 6.12(a) shows a K-map for the
decimal prime number function. We place an X in each square of the K-map
that corresponds to a don’t care input state. In effect we are dividing the
input states into three sets: f1 – those input combinations for which the
output must be 1; f0 – those input combinations for which the output must be
0; and fX – those input combinations where the output is not specified and
may be either 0 or 1. In this case, f1 is the set of five minterms labeled with 1
(1, 2, 3, 5, and 7), f0 contains the five minterms labeled 0 (0, 4, 6, 8, and 9),
and fX contains the remaining minterms (10–15).

--- Page 188 ---
Figure 6.12. Design of a decimal prime number circuit illustrating the use of don’t cares in a K-map.
(a) The K-map for the decimal prime number circuit. Input states 10–15 labeled with X are don’t care
states. (b) The K-map with prime implicants shown. The circuit has four prime implicants: 0XX1,
X01X, XX11, and X1X1. The first two are essential since they are the only implicants that cover 0001
and 0010, respectively; the last two (XX11 and X1X1) are not essential and in fact are not needed. (c)
A CMOS logic circuit derived from the K-map. The two NAND gates correspond to the two essential
prime implicants.
An implicant of an incompletely specified function is any product term
that includes at least one minterm from f1 and does not include any minterms
in f0. Thus we can expand our implicants by including minterms in fX. Figure
6.12(b) shows the four prime implicants of the decimal prime number
function. Note that implicant 001X of the original prime number function
has been expanded to X01X to include two minterms from fX. Two new
prime implicants, X1X1 and XX11, have been added, each by combining
two minterms from f1 with two minterms from fX. Note that products 11XX
and 1X1X, which are entirely in fX, are not implicants even though they
contain no minterms of f0. To be an implicant, a product must contain at least
one minterm from f1.
Using the notation of Equation (6.2) we can write a function with don’t
cares as follows:
(6.4)
That is, the function is the sum of five minterms plus six don’t care terms.
We form a cover of a function with don’t cares using the same procedure
described in Section 6.6. In the example of Figure 6.12 there are two

--- Page 189 ---
essential prime implicants: 0XX1 is the only prime implicant that includes
0001, and X01X is the only prime implicant that includes 0010. These two
essential prime implicants cover all five of the minterms in f1, so they form a
cover of the function. The resulting CMOS gate circuit is shown in Figure
6.12(c).
EXAMPLE 6.5 Incompletely specified function
Design a circuit that detects when its four-bit input equals 7. Take advantage of the fact that you know
the input is a prime number.
We fill in the Karnaugh map as shown in Figure 6.13 to divide our input space into f1, fX, and f0.
Input combination 7 is labeled 1, all non-prime input combinations are labeled X – because we know
these combinations won’t occur on our inputs, and the remaining input combinations are labeled 0.
The resulting circuit can be implemented with a single two-input AND gate.
Figure 6.13. Karnaugh map and cover for Example 6.5, an incompletely specified function.
f(c, b, a) = b ∧  c.
6.9 PRODUCT-OF-SUMS IMPLEMENTATION
So far we have focused on the input states where the truth table is a 1 and
have generated sum-of-products logic circuits. By duality we can also realize
product-of-sums logic circuits by focusing on the input states where the truth
table is 0. With CMOS implementations we generally prefer the sum-of-
products implementations because NAND gates have a lower logical effort
than NOR gates with the same fan-in. However, there are some functions
where the product-of-sums implementation is less expensive than the sum-
of-products. Often both are generated and the better circuit selected.

--- Page 190 ---
A maxterm is a sum (OR) that includes every variable or its complement.
Each 0 in a truth table or K-map corresponds to a maxterm. For example, the
logic function shown in the K-map of Figure 6.14 has two maxterms: a ∨  b
∨  c ∨  d and a ∨  b ∨  c ∨  d. For simplicity, we refer to these as OR(0000)
and OR(0010). Note that a maxterm corresponds to the complement of the
input state in the K-map, so maxterm 0, OR(0000), corresponds to a 0 in
square 15 of the K-map. We can combine adjacent 0s in the same way we
combined adjacent 1s, so OR(0000) and OR(0010) can be combined into
sum OR(00X0) = a ∨  c ∨  d.
Figure 6.14. K-map for a function with two maxterms OR(0000) and OR(0010) that can be combined
into a single sum, OR(00X0).
The design process for a product-of-sums circuit is identical to a sum-of-
products design except that 0s in the K-maps are grouped instead of 1s.
Figure 6.15 illustrates the process for a function with three maxterms. Figure
6.15(a) shows the K-map for the function. Two prime sums (OR terms that
cannot be made any larger without including 1s) are identified in Figure
6.15(b): OR(00X0) and OR(0X10). Both of these sums are needed to cover
all 0s in the K-map. Finally, Figure 6.15(c) shows the product-of-sums logic
circuit that computes this function. The circuit consists of two OR gates, one
for each of the prime sums, and an AND gate that combines the outputs of
the OR gates so that the output of the function is 0 when the output of either
OR gate is 0.

--- Page 191 ---
Figure 6.15. Product-of-sums synthesis. (a) K-map of a function with three maxterms. (b) Two prime
sums. (c) Product of sums logic circuit.
Once you have mastered sum-of-products design, the easiest way to
generate a product-of-sums logic circuit is to find the sum-of-products
circuit for the complement of the logic function (the function that results
from swapping f1 and f0 leaving fX unchanged.) Then, to complement the
output of this circuit, apply De Morgan’s theorem by changing all ANDs to
ORs and complementing the inputs of the circuit.
For example, consider our decimal prime number function. The K-map for
the complement of this function is shown in Figure 6.16(a). We identify
three prime implicants of this function in Figure 6.16(b). A sum-of-products
logic circuit that realizes the complement function of this K-map is shown in
Figure 6.16(c). This circuit follows directly from the three prime implicants.
Figure 6.16(d) shows the product-of-sums logic circuit that computes the
decimal prime number function (the complement of the K-map in (a) and
(b)). We derive this logic circuit by complementing the output of the circuit
of Figure 6.16(c) and applying De Morgan’s theorem to convert ANDs
(ORs) to ORs (ANDs).

--- Page 192 ---
Figure 6.16. Implementation of the decimal prime number circuit in product-of-sums form using the
complement method. (a) K-map for complement of the decimal prime number function (the decimal
composite number function). (b) Prime implicants of this function (XX00, X1X0, and 1XXX). (c)
Sum-of-products logic circuit that computes the complement decimal prime number function. (d)
Logic circuit that generates the decimal prime number function. This is derived from (c) using De
Morgan’s theorem.
EXAMPLE 6.6 Product of sums
Express the three-input function f = ∑in m(1, 7) as a minimal product-of-sums expression.
Drawing the Karnaugh map (Figure 6.17) and identifying the implicants of the complement of this
function f ′ = ∑in m(0, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6) we can write
f ′ = a ∨  (b ∧  c) ∨  (b ∧  c).
Figure 6.17. Karnaugh map and cover used to find a product-of-sums implementation of the function
specified in Example 6.6.
Then, applying Equation (3.9), we write
f = a ∧  (b ∨  c) ∧  (b ∨  c).

--- Page 193 ---
6.10 HAZARDS
On rare occasions we are concerned with whether or not our combinational
circuits generate transient outputs in response to a single transition on a
single input. Most of the time this is not an issue. For almost all
combinational circuits we are concerned only that the steady-state output for
a given input be correct – not how the output gets to its steady state.
However, in certain applications of combinational circuits, e.g., in
generating clocks or feeding an asynchronous circuit, it is critical that a
single input transition produces at most one output transition.
Consider, for example, the two-input multiplexer circuit shown in Figure
6.18. This circuit sets the output f equal to input a when c = 1 and equal to
input b when c = 0. The K-map for this circuit is shown in Figure 6.18(a).
The K-map shows two essential prime implicants, 1X1 (a ∧  c) and 01X (b ∧
c), that together cover the function. A logic circuit that implements the
function, using two AND gates for the two essential prime implicants, is
shown in Figure 6.18(b). The number within each gate denotes the delay of
the gate. The inverter on input c has a delay of 3, while the three other gates
all have unit delay.


--- Page 194 ---
Figure 6.18. Two-input multiplexer circuit with a static-1 hazard. (a) K-map of the function showing
two essential prime implicants. (b) Gate-level logic circuit for the multiplexer. The numbers denote the
delay (in arbitrary units) of each gate. (c) Timing diagram showing the response of the logic circuit of
(b) to a falling transition on input c when a = b = 1.
Figure 6.18(c) shows the transient response of this logic circuit when a =
b = 1 and input c transitions from 1 to 0 at time 1. Three time units later, at
time 4, the output of the inverter cN rises. In the meantime, the output of the
upper AND gate d falls at time 2, causing output f to fall at time 3. At time 4,
the rising of signal cN causes signal e to rise, which in turn causes signal f to
rise at time 6. Thus, a single transition on input c causes first a falling, then a
rising transition on output f.
This transient 1–0–1 on output f is called a static-1 hazard. The output is
normally expected to be a static 1, but has a transient hazard to 0. Similarly,
an output that undergoes a 0–1–0 response to a single input transition is said
to have a static-0 hazard. More complex circuits, with more levels of logic,
may also exhibit dynamic hazards. A dynamic-1 hazard is one in which an
output goes through the states 0–1–0–1: starting at 0 and ending at 1, but
with three transitions instead of 1. Similarly a dynamic-0 hazard is a three-
transition sequence ending in the 0 state.
Intuitively the static-1 hazard of Figure 6.18 occurs because, as the input
transitions from 111 to 011, the gate associated with implicant 1X1 turns off
before the gate associated with implicant 01X turns on. We can eliminate the
hazard by covering the transition with an implicant of its own, X11, as
shown in Figure 6.19. The third AND gate (the middle AND gate of Figure
6.19(b)), which corresponds to implicant X11, holds the output high while
the other two gates switch. In general, we can make any circuit hazard-free
by adding redundant implicants to cover transitions in this manner.
Figure 6.19. Two-input multiplexer circuit with no hazards. (a) K-map of the function showing three
prime implicants. The implicant X11 is needed to cover the transition from 111 to 011, even though it
is not essential. (b) Gate-level logic circuit for the hazard-free multiplexer.

--- Page 195 ---
EXAMPLE 6.7 Hazards
Fix the hazard that occurs in the circuit shown in Figure 6.20. That is, preserve the logic function of
the circuit while eliminating any hazards that occur during input transitions.
Figure 6.20. Schematic of a circuit with a hazard to be fixed in Example 6.7.
The two gates in Figure 6.20 correspond to implicants X00 and 0X1. Drawing the K-map for this
circuit (in Figure 6.21), we see the need to cover the transition from 000 to 001. Otherwise, depending
on relative gate speed, the output could momentarily go to 0 during this transition when one gate turns
off before the other gate turns on. Adding implicant 00X – circled with a dotted line – covers the
transition. The logic circuit shown in Figure 6.22 adds a gate for implicant 00X covering the transition
and eliminating the hazard.
Figure 6.21. K-map showing the function implemented by Figure 6.20. While the solid implicants
provide a cover, a hazard occurs when a toggles between 0 and1withb = c = 0. We fix the hazard by
adding the dashed implicant.
Figure 6.22. Circuit that provides the same functionality as Figure 6.20, but without any hazards.
Summary

--- Page 196 ---
In this chapter you have learned how to synthesize manually a
combinational logic circuit. Given an English-language description of a
circuit, you can generate a gate-level implementation. We start by writing a
truth table for the circuit to precisely define the behavior of the function.
Embedding the truth table in a Karnaugh map makesiteasytoidentify
implicants of the function. Recall that implicants are products that include at
least one minterm of f1 and no minterms of f0. They may or may not include
minterms of fX.
Once the implicants are identified, we generate a cover of the function by
finding a minimal set of implicants that together contain every minterm in f1.
We start by identifying the prime implicants, those that are included in no
larger implicant, and the essential prime implicants, prime implicants that
cover a minterm of f1 that is covered by no other prime implicant. We start
our cover with the essential prime implicants of the function and then add
prime implicants that include uncovered minterms of f1 until all of f1 is
covered. The cover is not unique; depending on the order in which we add
prime implicants to the cover, we may get a different final result.
From the cover it is straightforward to draw a CMOS logic circuit for the
function. Each implicant in the cover becomes a NAND gate, their outputs
are combined by a NAND gate (which performs the OR function), and
inverters are added to the inputs as needed.
While it is useful to understand this process for manual logic synthesis,
you will hardly ever use this procedure in practice. Modern logic design is
almost always achieved using automatic logic synthesis in which a CAD
program takes a high-level description of a logic function and automatically
generates the logic circuit. Automatic synthesis programs relieve logic
designers from the drudgery of crunching K-maps, enabling them to work at
a higher level and be more productive. Also, most automatic synthesis
programs produce logic circuits that are better than the ones a typical
designer could easily generate manually. The synthesis program considers
multi-level circuits and implementations that make use of special cells in the
library, and can try thousands of combinations before picking the best one. It
is best to let the CAD programs do what they are good at – finding the
optimal CMOS circuit to implement a given function – and have the
designer focus on what humans are good at – coming up with a clever high-
level organization for the system.

--- Page 197 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Further details about using mapping techniques to design logic can be found
in Karnaugh’s original paper [63]. This paper builds on techniques proposed
by Veitch in 1952 [109]. The Quine–McCluskey algorithm is used to find a
minimum mapping, detailed in McCluskey’s 1956 paper [74].
Exercises
6.1 Combinational circuits. Which of the circuits in Figure 6.23 are
combinational? Each of the boxes is itself a combinational circuit.
Figure 6.23. Circuits for Exercise 6.1. Each box is itself a combinational circuit.
6.2 Fibonacci circuit. Design a four-bit Fibonacci circuit. This circuit
outputs a 1 iff its input is a Fibonacci number (i.e., 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, or
13). Go through the following steps.
(a) Write a truth table for the function.
(b) Draw a Karnaugh map of the function.
(c) Identify the prime implicants of the function.
(d Identify which of the prime implicants (if any) are essential.

--- Page 198 ---
(e) Find a cover of the function.
(f) Draw a CMOS gate circuit for the function.
6.3 Minimum logic. Draw a logic diagram that realizes a function that is
true when the input (dcba) is 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 13, 14, or 15. Use the
minimum possible number of gate inputs. Both true and
complementary inputs are available (i.e., you have both a and a′).
6.4 Decimal Fibonacci circuit. Repeat Exercise 6.2, but for a decimal
Fibonacci circuit. This circuit need only produce an output for inputs
in the range 0–9. The output is a don’t care for the other six input
states.
6.5 Prime number circuit. Design a circuit whose output is true if its four-
bit input is really a prime number – not including “1” – that is, the
output is true if the input is 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, or 13. Go through the same
steps as in Exercise 6.2.
6.6 Decimal prime number circuit. Design a circuit whose output is true if
its four-bit decimal input is really a prime number – not including “1”
– that is, the output is true if the input is 2, 3, 5 or 7. The output is an X
(don’t care) for input combinations 10–15. Go through the same steps
as in Exercise 6.2.
6.7 Multiple-of-3 circuit. Design a four-input multiple-of-3 circuit, that is a
circuit whose output is true if the input is 3, 6, 9, 12, or 15.
6.8 Combinational design. Design a minimal CMOS circuit that
implements the function f = ∑m(3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 13, 14, 15).
6.9 Five-input prime number circuit. Design a five-input prime number
circuit. The output is true if the input is a prime number (not including
“1”) between 0 and 31.
6.10Six-input prime number circuit. Design a six-input prime number
circuit. This circuit must also recognize the primes between 32 and 63
(neither of which is prime).
6.11 Non-unique cover. Design a four-input circuit that implements the
function f = m (0, 1, 2, 9, 10, 11).
6.12Product of sums, I. Design the decimal Fibonnaci circuit of Exercise
6.4 in product-of-sums form.
6.13Product of sums, II. Design the decimal prime number circuit of
Exercise 6.6 in product-of-sums form.
6.14Seven-segment decoder, I. This and following exercises (6.14–6.41)
share the description of a seven-segment decoder, a combinational

--- Page 199 ---
circuit with a four-bit input a and a seven-bit output q. Each bit of q
corresponds to one of the seven segments of a display according to the
following pattern:
That is, bit 0 (the LSB) of q controls the top segment, bit 1 the upper
right segment, and so on, with bit 6 (the MSB) controlling the middle
segment. Seven-segment decoders are described in more detail in
Section 7.3. A full decoder decodes all 16 input combinations –
approximating the letters A–F (capital A, C, E, F and lowercase b, d)
for combinations 10–15. A decimal decoder decodes only
combinations 0–9, the remainder are don’t cares.
Design a sum-of-products circuit for segment 0 of a full seven-
segment decoder.
6.15Seven-segment decoder, II. Design a sum-of-products circuit for
segment 1 of the full seven-segment decoder described in Exercise
6.14.
6.16Seven-segment decoder, III. Design a sum-of-products circuit for
segment 2 of the full seven-segment decoder described in Exercise
6.14.
6.17Seven-segment decoder, IV. Design a sum-of-products circuit for
segment 3 of the full seven-segment decoder described in Exercise
6.14.
6.18Seven-segment decoder, V. Design a sum-of-products circuit for
segment 4 of the full seven-segment decoder described in Exercise
6.14.
6.19Seven-segment decoder, VI. Design a sum-of-products circuit for
segment 5 of the full seven-segment decoder described in Exercise
6.14.
6.20Seven-segment decoder, VII. Design a sum-of-products circuit for
segment 6 of the full seven-segment decoder described in Exercise
6.14.

--- Page 200 ---
6.21Decimal seven-segment decoder, I. Design a sum-of-products circuit
for segment 0 of the decimal seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.22Decimal seven-segment decoder, II. Design a sum-of-products circuit
for segment 1 of the decimal seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.23Decimal seven-segment decoder, III. Design a sum-of-products circuit
for segment 2 of the decimal seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.24Decimal seven-segment decoder, IV. Design a sum-of-products circuit
for segment 3 of the decimal seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.25Decimal seven-segment decoder, V. Design a sum-of-products circuit
for segment 4 of the decimal seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.26Decimal seven-segment decoder, VI. Design a sum-of-products circuit
for segment 5 of the decimal seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.27Decimal seven-segment decoder, VII. Design a sum-of-products circuit
for segment 6 of the decimal seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.28Product-of-sums seven-segment decoder, I. Design a product-of-sums
circuit for segment 0 of the full seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.29Product-of-sums seven-segment decoder, II. Design a product-of-sums
circuit for segment 1 of the full seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.30Product-of-sums seven-segment decoder, III. Design a product-of-sums
circuit for segment 2 of the full seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.31Product-of-sums seven-segment decoder, IV. Design a product-of-sums
circuit for segment 3 of the full seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.32Product-of-sums seven-segment decoder, V. Design a product-of-sums
circuit for segment 4 of the full seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.

--- Page 201 ---
6.33Product-of-sums seven-segment decoder, VI. Design a product-of-sums
circuit for segment 5 of the full seven-segment decoder described in
Exercise 6.14.
6.34Product-of-sums seven-segment decoder, VII. Design a product-of-
sums circuit for segment 6 of the full seven-segment decoder described
in Exercise 6.14.
6.35Product-of-sums decimal seven-segment decoder, I. Design a product-
of-sums circuit for segment 0 of the decimal seven-segment decoder
described in Exercise 6.14.
6.36Product-of-sums decimal seven-segment decoder, II. Design a product-
of-sums circuit for segment 1 of the decimal seven-segment decoder
described in Exercise 6.14.
6.37Product-of-sums decimal seven-segment decoder, III. Design a product-
of-sums circuit for segment 2 of the decimal seven-segment decoder
described in Exercise 6.14.
6.38Product-of-sums decimal seven-segment decoder, IV. Design a product-
of-sums circuit for segment 3 of the decimal seven-segment decoder
described in Exercise 6.14.
6.39Product-of-sums decimal seven-segment decoder, V. Design a product-
of-sums circuit for segment 4 of the decimal seven-segment decoder
described in Exercise 6.14.
6.40Product-of-sums decimal seven-segment decoder, VI. Design a product-
of-sums circuit for segment 5 of the decimal seven-segment decoder
described in Exercise 6.14.
6.41Product-of-sums decimal seven-segment decoder, VII. Design a
product-of-sums circuit for segment 6 of the decimal seven-segment
decoder described in Exercise 6.14.
6.42Multiple outputs, I. Design a sum-of-products circuit that generates
outputs for segments 0, 1, and 2 of the decimal seven-segment decoder
described in Exercise 6.14. Share logic between the outputs where
possible.
6.43Multiple outputs, II. Design a sum-of-products circuit that generates
outputs for segments 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the decimal seven-segment
decoder described in Exercise 6.14. Share logic between the outputs
where possible.
6.44Hazards, I. Fix the hazard that may occur in Figure 6.24(a).

--- Page 202 ---
Figure 6.24. Circuits for Exercise 6.44 and 6.45.
6.45Hazards, II. Fix the hazard that may occur in Figure 6.24(b).
6.46Adder Karnaugh maps, I. A half adder is a circuit which takes in one-
bit binary numbers a and b and outputs a sum s and a carry out co. The
concatenation of co and s co,s is the two-bit value that results from
adding a and b (e.g., if a = 1 and b = 1, s = 0and co = 1). Half adders
are described in more detail in Chapter 10.
(a) Write out truth tables for the s and co outputs of a half adder.
(b) Draw Karnaugh maps for the s and co outputs of the half adder.
(c) Circle the prime implicants and write out the logic equations for
the s and co outputs of the half adder.
6.47Adder Karnaugh maps, II. A full adder is a circuit which takes in one-
bit binary numbers a, b, and ci (carry in), and outputs s and co. The
concatenation of co and s {co,s} is the two-bit value that results from
adding a, b, and ci (e.g., if a = 1, b = 0, and ci = 1 then s = 0 and co =
1). Full adders are described in more detail in Chapter 10.
(a) Write out the truth tables for the s and co outputs for the full adder.
(b) Draw Karnaugh maps for the s and co outputs of the full adder.
(c) Circle the prime implicants and write out the logic equations for
the s and co outputs of the full adder.
(d) How would the use of an XOR gate help in the half adder? How
would it help in the full adder?
1 Note that this is really a “prime-or-one” function since it is true when the input is “1” and “1” is not
a prime number [45]. We leave it as an exercise (Exercise 6.5) to design a prime number function
that does not include “1.”
2 One implicant is larger than another if it contains more minterms. For example, implicant 001 has
size 1 because it contains just one minterm. Implicant 01X has size 2 because it contains two
minterms (001 and 011) and hence is larger.
3 The use of the word “prime” here has nothing to do with the prime number function.

--- Page 203 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 204 ---
7
VHDL descriptions of combinational logic
In Chapter 6 we saw how to synthesize combinational logic circuits
manually from a specification. In this chapter we show how to describe
combinational circuits in the VHDL hardware description language,
building on our discussion of Boolean expressions in VHDL (Section 3.6)
and the initial discussion of VHDL (Section 1.5). Once the function has
been described in VHDL, it can be automatically synthesized, eliminating
the need for manual synthesis.
Because all optimization is done by the synthesizer, the main goal in
writing synthesizable VHDL is to make it easily readable and
maintainable. For this reason, descriptions that are close to the function of
a design (e.g., a truth table specified with a case statement) are preferable
to those that are close to the implementation (e.g., equations using a
concurrent assignment statement, or a structural description using gates).
Descriptions that specify just the function tend to be easier to read and
maintain than those that reflect a manual implementation of the function.
To verify that a VHDL design entity is correct, we write a testbench. A
testbench is a piece of VHDL code that is used during simulation to
instantiate the design entity to be tested, generate input stimulus, and
check the design entity’s outputs. While design entities must be coded in a
strict synthesizable subset of VHDL, testbenches, which are not
synthesized, can use the full VHDL language, including looping
constructs. In a typical modern digital design project, at least as much
effort goes into design verification (writing testbenches) as goes into
doing the design itself.

--- Page 205 ---
7.1 THE PRIME NUMBER CIRCUIT IN VHDL
In describing combinational logic using VHDL we restrict our use of the
language to constructs that can easily be synthesized into logic circuits.
Specifically, we restrict combinational circuits to be described using only
concurrent signal assignment statements, case statements, if statements, or
by the structural composition of other combinational design entities.
In this section we look at four ways of implementing the prime number
(plus 1) circuit we introduced in Chapter 6 as combinational VHDL.
7.1.1A VHDL design entity
Before diving into our four implementations of the prime number circuit, we
quickly review the structure of a VHDL design entity. A design entity is a
block of logic with specified input and output ports. Logic within the design
entity computes the outputs based on the inputs – on just the current state of
the inputs for a design entity implementing combinational logic. After
declaring a design entity, we can instantiate one or more copies, or instances,
of the design entity within a higher-level design entity.
The basic form of a VHDL design entity is shown in Figure 7.1, and a
design entity that implements the four-bit prime number function using a
VHDL process statement is shown in Figure 7.2. All design entities are
composed of two parts – an entity declaration and an architecture body. The
entity declaration starts with the keyword entity. The design entity name is
given between the keyword entity and the keyword is (e.g., prime in
Figure 7.2). Following the keyword port is a list of input and output signal
declarations in parentheses. Each signal includes the name of the signal,
followed by a colon (:) followed by the signal direction specified using in
for inputs and out for outputs. VHDL also defines signal directions buffer
and inout. Use buffer for outputs that are read inside a design entity.1
Signal direction inout should be used only for interface signals that are
bidirectional and is rarely used in practice. The direction is followed by the
type of the signal. For example, in Figure 7.2 the input signal input has type
std_logic_vector and the output signal isprime has type std_logic (these
types were introduced in Section 1.5).

--- Page 206 ---
Figure 7.1. A VHDL design entity consists of an entity declaration containing a list of input and
output signal port declarations followed by an architecture body containing internal signal declarations
followed by a set of concurrent statements. The logic of the design entity is implemented by the
concurrent statements.
Figure 7.2. VHDL description of the four-bit prime-or-one number function using a case statement to
encode the truth table directly.
The architecture body statements perform the logic that computes the
design entity outputs. The architecture body starts with the keyword
architecture followedbyanidentifier,then the keyword of (e.g., case_impl
in Figure 7.2), then the name of the entity declaration, then the keyword is.
Next optional lists of components and internal signals are given before the

--- Page 207 ---
keyword begin (none in the example in Figure 7.2). Next is a list of
concurrent statements. Unlike statements in a software programming
language such as C or Java, in VHDL each concurrent statement operates in
parallel. In the subset of VHDL we will use in this book, the concurrent
statements consist of one or more process statements, concurrent signal
assignments, component instantiations, or generate statements. Examples of
the first three of these are given in the four implementations of the prime
number circuit in Sections 7.1.2 to 7.1.8. We defer discussion of generate
statements to Section 9.1.
7.1.2The case statement
As shown in Figure 7.2, a VHDL case statement allows us to specify
directly the truth table of a logic function. The case statement must appear
inside a process and it allows us to specify the output value of a logic
function for each input combination. The signal after the case keyword and
before the keyword is indicates the input of the lookup table. Inside a case
statement the keyword when is used to specify the rows of the lookup table.
In this example, to save space we specify all the input states where the
output, isprime, is 1 using a list of different input states separated by a pipe
“|” symbol. To specify a default rule that applies for inputs that do not
match we use the keyword others. In the default case we assign the output,
isprime, to 0. The arrow compound delimiter, =>, separates the list of input
states from a statement used to assign the output of the truth table.
The general form of an std_logic_vector value in VHDL-2008 is
<size> <base>"<value>" (also known as a bit string literal). Here <size>
is a decimal number that describes the width of the number in bits. In each
constant definition, the size of the number is 7, specifying that each constant
is seven bits wide. Note that 3b"0" and 7b"0" are different numbers; both
have the value 0, but the first is three bits wide while the second is seven bits
wide. The <base> portion of a number is b for binary, d for decimal, o for
octal (base 8), or x for hexadecimal (base 16). Finally, the "<value>" portion
of the number is the value in the specified base. Versions of VHDL prior to
VHDL-2008 do not support <size>, or "d" for <base>. If <size> is omitted,
the width is inferred from the number of digits in <value>. For example,
x"00" is eight bits wide since a single hexadecimal digit is four bits. If
<size> and <base> are both omitted, then in addition the base is assumed to

--- Page 208 ---
be binary. For example, "0101" is a four-bit binary number having a value of
five.
Note that case statements must be contained within a VHDL process
statement. This syntax in Figure 7.2 specifies that the case statement will be
evaluated each time the signals listed in the parenthesis after the process
keyword change state. In this example, the case statement is evaluated each
time the four-bit input signal input changes state.
Whenever a process statement is used to describe a combinational circuit,
it is critical that all inputs be included in the sensitivity list. The sensitivity
list is a comma separated list of signals in parentheses after the process
keyword. If an input is omitted from the sensitivity list, the body of the
process statement will not be evaluated when that input changes. The result
will be sequential, not combinational, logic. Another way of saying this is
that omitting signals from the sensitivity list will often result in odd behavior
that can be difficult to debug. In the latest version of VHDL, VHDL-2008,
this can be avoided by using the keyword all for the sensitivity list, i.e.,
process(all). This causes the process to evaluate any time any signal read
inside the process changes state. We use this syntax throughout the book.
The result of synthesizing the VHDL description of Figure 7.2 with the
Synopsys Design Compiler® using a typical CMOS standard cell library is
shown in Figure 7.3. The synthesizer has converted the behavioral VHDL
description of Figure 7.2, which specifies what is to be done (i.e., a truth
table), to a structural VHDL description, which specifies how to do it (i.e.,
five gates and the connections between them). The structural VHDL
instantiates five gates: two OR-AND-invert gates (OAI), two inverters
(INV), and one exclusive-OR gate (XOR). The four wires connecting the
gates are declared as n1 through n4. For each gate, the Design Compiler®
output instantiates the gate by using a component instantiation statement by
providing a label for the component followed by a colon (:), followed by the
type of the gate (e.g., 0AI13), and then specifying which signal is connected
to each gate input and output using a port map aspect with named
association using the arrow compound delimiter. For example, “A1 => n2”
means that signal n2 is connected to gate input A1).

--- Page 209 ---
Figure 7.3. Result of synthesizing the VHDL description of Figure 7.2 with the Synopsys Design
Compiler® using a typical standard cell library. A schematic of this synthesized circuit is shown in
Figure 7.4.
Note that a design entity can be instantiated either with named association,
which explicitly connects input and output signals, or with a simplified
notation. For example, if the ports were declared in the order shown, we
could instantiate the XOR gate with the following syntax, known as
positional association:
U4: XOR2 port map (input(2), input(1), n4);
Using positional association, the above statement implicitly connects
input(2) with input A because input(2) is listed first in the association list
and input A is declared first in the component declaration. Named and
positional association are equivalent. For complex components, the named
association syntax avoids getting the order wrong (and prevents errors when

--- Page 210 ---
the underlying order changes). For simple components, the positional
association syntax is more compact and easier to read. Also, the notation
input(2) indicates that we want to access only the bit with index “2” from
input.
Figure 7.4 shows a schematic of the synthesized circuit to show how the
synthesizer has optimized the logic. Unlike the two-level synthesis method
we employed in Chapter 6, the synthesizer has used four levels of logic (not
counting inverters), including an XOR gate in addition to the ANDs and
ORs. However, this circuit still implements the same four prime implicants
(0XX1, 001X, X101, and X011). As shown in the figure, the bottom part of
gate U1 directly implements implicant 001X. Gate U5 implements the other
three implicants – factoring input(0) out of the implicants so that this AND
can be shared across all three. The top input to the OR of U5 (n3) ANDed
with input(0) gives 0XX1. The output of the XOR gate gives products
X01X and X10X, which, when ANDed with input(0) in U5, give the
remaining two implicants X101 and X011.
Figure 7.4. Schematic showing the circuit of Figure 7.3.
This synthesis example illustrates the power of modern computer-aided
design tools. A skilled designer would have to spend considerable effort to
generate a circuit as compact as this one. Moreover, the synthesis tool can
(via a constraint file) be asked to reoptimize this circuit for speed rather than
area with minimum effort. With modern synthesis tools, the primary role of
the logic designer has changed from one of optimization to one of
specification. This specification task, however, continues to increase in
complexity as systems become larger.
EXAMPLE 7.1 Thermometer code detector with case

--- Page 211 ---
Write a design entity that detects whether a four-bit input is a legal thermometer encoded signal (0000,
0001, 0011, 0111, 1111). Implement the logic using a case statement.
The design entity, shown in Figure 7.5, is implemented by first declaring the input (input) and
output (output). The case statement is written in two lines: a list of minterms that output 1 and a
default statement to output 0.
Figure 7.5. The VHDL for a thermometer code detector implemented with a case statement.
7.1.3The case? statement
VHDL-2008 includes a matching case statement which uses the keyword
case? instead of case. The matching case enables the designer to specify
multiple inputs using the std_logic “don’t care” symbol (“-”). An
alternative implementation of the prime number function using case? to
specify implicants that cover the function is shown in Figure 7.6. Since we
have already provided an entity declaration for prime in Figure 7.2 we need
only provide the architecture body, though we must give the architecture
body a different name (match_case_impl). This implementation is similar to
the one in Figure 7.2 except that we use the case? statement in place of the
case statement. The case? statement allows don’t cares (-s) in the cases.
This allows us to put implicants, rather than just minterms, on the left side of
each case. For example, the first case "0-1" corresponds to implicant 0XX1
and covers minterms 1, 3, 5, and 7. A restriction of the matching case?
statement is that each when clause must not overlap. For example "0-1"
overlaps with "001-" because both contain the minterm 3.

--- Page 212 ---
Figure 7.6. VHDL architecture body of the four-bit prime number function using a matching case
statement to describe the implicants in a cover. Note entity declaration is in Figure 7.2.
The matching case statement is useful in describing combinational design
entities where one input overrides the others; for example, when a disable
input causes all outputs to go low regardless of the other inputs, or for a
priority encoder (see Section 8.5). For the prime number function, however,
the implementation in Figure 7.2 is preferred because it more clearly
describes the function being implemented and is easier to maintain. There is
no need to reduce the function to implicants manually, the synthesis tools do
this.
EXAMPLE 7.2 Thermometer code detector with case?
Write a design entity that detects whether a four-bit input is a legal thermometer encoded signal using
a matching case statement. Assume the entity declaration from Figure 7.5 has already been given so
that you need only provide a new architecture body definition.
This is a scenario where the synthesizer is better suited to do the logic reduction. Nevertheless, the
thermometer code function can be written as follows:
f(a3, a2, a1, a0) = (a3 ∧  a2 ∧  a1) ∨  (a3 ∧  a2 ∧  a1 ∧  a0) ∨  (a2 ∧  a1 ∧  a0).
Implementing this function in a matching case statement yields Figure 7.7.

--- Page 213 ---
Figure 7.7. The VHDL architecture body for a thermometer code detector with a case? statement.
Note entity declaration is in Figure 7.5.
7.1.4The if statement
It is possible to describe combinational logic using if statements as
illustrated in Figure 7.8 for the prime-or-one circuit. An if statement must
appear inside a process and begins with the VHDL keyword if followed by
an expression that returns a value of type boolean followed by the keyword
then. After the keyword then one provides a list of sequential statements. In
this example we include a single signal assignment statement, “isprime <=
’1’;”. Multiple conditions can be considered in a single if statement by
using the VHDL keyword elsif, which stands for “else if”. In this example
we include an elsif test for each prime number between 2 and 13. Finally,
one can include a default action in case none of the prior conditions
evaluated to true by using the keyword else. In this example we assign
isprime <= ’0’ when input is not a prime number by using else.

--- Page 214 ---
Figure 7.8. VHDL description of the four-bit prime-or-one number function using an if statement to
encode the truth table directly. Note entity declaration is in Figure 7.2.
While if statements are quite intuitive to anyone who has spent time
writing software, we suggest avoiding using them as much as possible. The
reason is that it is too easy to accidentally generate a sequential circuit by
excluding an else clause, or by forgetting to assign to every output variable
in every branch of the if statement (see Rule C2 in Section B.10.1). In this
textbook, we use if statements only when specifying the next state function
of state machines (Chapter 14).
7.1.5Concurrent signal assignment statements
VHDL statements appearing inside of a process are known as sequential
statements. Statements not in a process are known as concurrent statements.
Figure 7.9 shows a fourth VHDL description of the prime number circuit.
This version uses a concurrent signal assignment statement statement to
describe the logic function using an equation. There is little advantage to
describing the prime number circuit with an equation. The truth table
description is easier to write, easier to read, and easier to maintain. The
synthesizer reduces the truth table to an equation and optimized set of gates.

--- Page 215 ---
Figure 7.9. VHDL architecture body description of the four-bit prime number function using a
concurrent assignment statement. Note entity declaration is in Figure 7.2.
EXAMPLE 7.3 Thermometer code detector with concurrent signal assignment statement
Write a design entity that detects whether a four-bit input is a legal thermometer encoded signal using
a concurrent signal assignment statement. Assume the entity declaration from Figure 7.5 has already
been given so that you need only provide a new architecture body definition.
This is a scenario where the synthesizer is better suited to do the logic reduction. Nevertheless, the
thermometer code function can be written as follows:
f(a3, a2, a1, a0) = (a3 ∧  a2 ∧  a1) ∨  (a3 ∧  a2 ∧  a1 ∧  a0) ∨  (a2 ∧  a1 ∧  a0).
Writing this equation as a concurrent signal assignment statement yields Figure 7.10.
Figure 7.10. The VHDL architecture body for a thermometer code detector implemented with a
concurrent signal assignment statement.
7.1.6Selected signal assignment statements
Figure 7.11 illustrates the prime function using a selected signal assignment
statement. A selected signal assignment statement begins with the keyword
with, followed by the name of a signal that is read, followed by the keyword
select, followed by the name of the signal that will be assigned to. The
value assigned to, isprime in this example, is determined by matching the
value of the expression between the keywords with and select, input in
this example, against the choices listed after the keyword when. Choices are
separated by a pipe delimiter (|). The choice on the right side of when must
be distinct constants. The keyword others can be used as a shorthand for
values not explicitly listed. Multiple possible assignment values, indicated

--- Page 216 ---
by multiple when clauses, are separated by commas. A selected signal
assignment can be used to implement truth tables more compactly than a
case statement, but cannot appear inside a process.2
Figure 7.11. VHDL architecture body description of the four-bit prime number function using a
selected signal assignment statement. Note entity declaration is in Figure 7.2.
7.1.7Conditional signal assignment statements
Figure 7.12 illustrates the prime function using a conditional signal
assignment statement. Here the value assigned to isprime is determined by
evaluating the expression after each when statement. Conditional signal
assignment statements are useful for expressing simple comparison logic.
They are also useful when one condition takes precedence over another. If
multiple when conditions evaluate to true the first one, in the order listed in
the statement, takes priority. Similarly to the selected signal assignment
statement, the conditional signal assignment statement cannot be used inside
a process.
Figure 7.12. VHDL description of the four-bit prime number function using a conditional signal
assignment statement.
7.1.8Structural description

--- Page 217 ---
Our final description of the prime number function, shown in Figure 7.13, is
a structural description that, much like the output of the synthesizer in Figure
7.3, describes the function by instantiating components and describing the
connections between them. Unlike the synthesizer output in Figure 7.3, this
description does not instantiate components like OAI13. Instead we have
constructed the circuit using implicants found from the K-map in Figure 6.6
in Section 6.5. In addition Figure 7.13 includes a specification of the design
entities for the and_gate components that are instantiated and an example of
a configuration statement used to select which architecture body to bind to
each component instantiation. Instead of instantiating gates for the or gate
and inverters we use four concurrent assignment statements, e.g., “n1 <=
not input(1);”. We do this to emphasize that concurrent assignment
statements and component instantiations can both be employed together.
Also important to note is that, since both are concurrent statements, the order
of component instantiation and concurrent assignment statement lines does
not matter. Unlike in a software language, the multiple component
instantiations and concurrent assignment statements operate in parallel. We
illustrate both positional (AND1) and named association (AND2, AND3,
AND4) for component instantiation. The component and entity declarations
for the and_gate include a default input assignment for unused inputs with
the syntax := ’1’. We do this to enable us to specify both three-input
(AND1, AND3, AND4) and gates and, using positional association, a two-
input (AND2) and gate with a single entity declaration.

--- Page 219 ---
Figure 7.13. VHDL description of the four-bit prime number function using structural description
including an (optional) configuration declaration.
We include two architecture bodies for and_gate with different
implementations identified by logic_impl and alt_impl. We can optionally
specify which implementation to use for each component instantiation using
a configuration declaration. Configuration declarations are usually omitted
in simple designs where there is a single architecture body for each entity
declaration.
The optional configuration declaration starts with the keyword
configuration followed by a configuration name (e.g., my_config in Figure
7.13), the keyword of, the name of the entity being configured (e.g., prime)
and the keyword is. Next, since there may be multiple architecture bodies,
we specify the specific one being configured (e.g., struct_impl) after the
first for. Then, for each component instantiation, we specify a binding to a
particular entity and architecture body combination. This binding step is
performed by first specifying the instances to bind using for statements
nested inside the first for (e.g., “for AND1, AND3 : and_gate”), then the
design entity they are bound to (e.g., use entity
work.and_gate(alt_impl)”).
We show this structural description of the prime number circuit to
illustrate the range of the VHDL language. For a design as simple as the
prime number function the designer should use one of the earlier
representations and let the synthesizer do the synthesis and optimization. For
a simple circuit like the prime number example, a synthesis program like
Synopsys Design Compiler® will generate the same circuit (Figure 7.3) for
all of the specifications in Figures 7.2, 7.6, 7.8, 7.9, 7.11, 7.12, and 7.13.
More typically, a structural description would be used only when
instantiating much larger components than the and_gate component used
here.
EXAMPLE 7.4 Structural thermometer code detector
Write a structural VHDL design entity which detects whether a four-bit input is a legal thermometer
encoded signal. Assume the entity declaration from Figure 7.5 has already been given so that you need
only provide a new architecture body definition.
Rewritten from Example 7.3, the reduced logic function is given by
f(a3, a2, a1, a0) = (a3 ∧  a2 ∧  a1) ∨  (a3 ∧  a2 ∧  a1 ∧  a0) ∨  (a2 ∧  a1 ∧  a0).
We directly instantiate AND gates in the VHDL, assigning the AND gates’ outputs to intermediate
signals (t2, t1, t0). The configuration statement uses the keyword all to indicate that all

--- Page 220 ---
component instantiations of and_gate are bound to work.and_gate(impl). The resulting VHDL is
shown in Figure 7.14.
Figure 7.14. Structural VHDL for a thermometer code detector.
7.1.9The decimal prime number function
Figure 7.15 illustrates how incompletely specified functions (see Section
6.8) can be described in VHDL. While a matching case (Section 7.1.3)
allows simplifying a specification by indicating the output for an implicant
larger than a minterm, here we instead wish to enable the synthesis tool to
further optimize the circuit. We again use the VHDL case statement to

--- Page 221 ---
specify a truth table. In this example we specify that input states 10 to 15
have a don’t care output by using the default (i.e., others =>) case
alternative to assign the std_logic value ’-’ (i.e., don’t care) to isprime.
Because we can have only a single default statement, and here we choose to
use it to specify don’t cares, we must explicitly include the five input states
for which the output is 0.
Figure 7.15. VHDL description of the four-bit decimal prime number function using a case statement
with don’t care on the default output.
The result of synthesizing the VHDL description of Figure 7.15 using the
Synopsys Design Compiler® is shown in Figure 7.16, and a schematic
diagram of the synthesized circuit is shown in Figure 7.17. With the don’t
cares specified, the logic is reduced to one two-input gate, one three-input
gate, and one inverter, as compared with one four-input gate, one three-input
gate, an XOR, and two inverters for the fully specified circuit.

--- Page 222 ---
Figure 7.16. Results of synthesizing the VHDL description of Figure 7.15 using the Synopsys Design
Compiler®. A schematic of this synthesized circuit is shown in Figure 7.17. The resulting circuit is
considerably simpler than the fully specified circuit of Figure 7.4.
Figure 7.17. Schematic showing the circuit of Figure 7.16.

--- Page 223 ---
7.2 A TESTBENCH FOR THE PRIME NUMBER
CIRCUIT
To test via simulation that the VHDL description of a design entity is correct,
we write a VHDL testbench that exercises the design entity. A testbench is
itself a VHDL design entity. It is a design entity that is never synthesized to
hardware and is used only to facilitate testing of the design entity under test.
The testbench design entity instantiates the design entity under test,
generates the input signals to exercise the design entity, and checks the
output signals of the design entity for correctness. The testbench is
analogous to the instrumentation you would use on a lab bench to generate
input signals and observe output signals from a circuit.
Figure 7.18 shows a simple testbench for the prime number circuit. As in
the first testbench we saw in Figure 3.8, we surround the testbench VHDL
with a -- pragma translate_off and -- pragma translate_on pair to
prevent synthesis while allowing the testbench in the same file as the
synthesizable design entity being tested. As an alternative we could put the
testbench in a separate file, which is used for simulation but not for
synthesis. The testbench is itself a VHDL design entity, but it has no inputs
or outputs. Internal signals are used as the inputs and outputs of the design
entity under test, in this case prime. The testbench declares the input of the
prime design entity, count, as a signal of type std_logic_vector. When
we know we want to instantiate a specific architecture we can use direct
instantiation rather than component and configuration declarations. Hence,
the testbench instantiates an instance of design entity prime with architecture
body case_impl using
DUT: entity work.prime(case_impl) port map(input,
isprime);
The syntax to directly instantiate a design entity is given by
<inst_label>: entity <entity_name>(<arch_identifier>) port map
(<assoc_list>);
where <inst_label> is a label for the instance, <entity_name> is the name
of the design entity from the entity declaration, <arch_identifier> is the
name of the architecture body, and <assoc_list> is an association list using

--- Page 224 ---
either position or named association format. In our example <entity_name>
is work.prime. We preface prime with “work.” because as it analyzes each
entity declaration and architecture body a VHDL compiler records the
resulting design unit in the working library, which by convention is called
“work”.
Figure 7.18. VHDL testbench for prime number design entity.findexto_integer
The actual test code for the testbench is contained within a process
statement. This process statement is like the ones we saw earlier (e.g., Figure
7.2 and Figure 7.15) except that, instead of being executed every time an
input signal changes, it is executed repeatedly, starting at the beginning of
the simulation. This is because it lacks a sensitivity list containing signals
(e.g., input in Figure 7.2) to trigger the statements inside the process to be
evaluated. That is, in Figure 7.18 there are no signals listed in parentheses
after the process keyword. During each iteration of the for loop, the
simulator sets input to the iteration count. To do this, we convert i to
unsigned, which is like std_logic_vector except that the bits are

--- Page 225 ---
interpreted as an unsigned number (i.e., zero or positive). We perform the
conversion using the function to_unsigned declared in package
ieee.numeric_std. The first argument to the function to_unsigned is an
integer. The second argument specifies the bit width of the result. We then
convert the unsigned result to std_logic_vector using a type conversion,
which is similar to a type cast in a programming language like C or C++.
Next the line “wait for 10 ns;” specifies that during simulation the
process should wait for 10 nanoseconds of simulated time before executing
the next statement. This allows time for the output of the design under test to
settle. The next line displays the input and output using report. To print out
input, which is of type std_logic_vector in decimal, we first apply a type
conversion to unsigned, then call the function to_integer defined in
ieee.numeric_std, then call the function to_string. After 16 iterations, the
loop completes. The call to the VHDL-2008 function std.env.stop() after
the loop stops simulation. Without it the process would immediately restart
after the for loop exits. An alternative is to use an unconditional wait
statement, i.e., “wait;”.
In Figure 7.18 the DUT component operates in parallel with the process
that generates inputs and prints the outputs. The inputs to DUT are transfered
from the process via the signal input. Similarly, the output of DUT is
transfered to the process via the signal isprime. Note that isprime can be
read inside the process even though the process does not have a sensitivity
list. The sensitivity list of a process is not the same as the arguments of a
function in a software language.
The testbench does not describe a piece of our design, but rather is just a
source of input stimuli, or test patterns, and a monitor of output results.
Because the testbench design entity does not have to be synthesized, it can
use VHDL constructs that are not permitted in synthesizable designs. For
example, the process without a sensitivity list, for-loop, and wait for 10
ns statements in Figure 7.18 are not allowed in synthesizable VHDL design
entities, but are quite useful in testbenches.3 When writing VHDL, it is
important to keep in mind whether one is writing synthesizable code or a
testbench. Very different styles are used for each.
The output of a VHDL simulation of the testbench of Figure 7.18 and the
prime number design entity of Figure 7.2 is shown in Figure 7.19. Each
iteration of the for loop, the report statement in the testbench, prints one
line of output. The argument to the report command must be a string. The

--- Page 226 ---
string we print is formed by joining several strings using the concatenation
operator ‘&’. VHDL-2008 includes the to_string function in the
ieee.std_logic_1164 package.4 As its name suggests, to_string converts
a value to a string. The output is decimal format string for integer data types
and binary for std_logic_vector. There are also functions for printing in
hexadecimal (to_hstring) and octal (to_ostring). To print input in
decimal, we first convert it to type unsigned, which is essentially a
std_logic_vector that is interpreted as 2’s complement unsigned number.
We then use the function to_integer, defined in ieee.numeric_std, to
convert from unsigned to an integer. In contrast to std_logic_vector and
unsigned, an integer is at least 32 bits in VHDL.
Figure 7.19. Output from testbench of Figure 7.18 on the design entity described in Figure 7.2.
By examining the output, we can see that the prime number design entity
is operating correctly.
Checking a VHDL design entity by manually examining its output works
fine for small design entities that need to be checked just once. However, for
larger design entities, or repeated testing,5 manual checking is tedious and
error-prone. In such cases, the testbench must check results in addition to
generating inputs.
One approach to a self-checking testbench is to instantiate two separate
implementations of the design entity and compare their outputs, as shown in

--- Page 227 ---
Figure 7.20. (Another approach is to use an inverse function as shown in
Section 7.3.) In Figure 7.20, the testbench creates one instance of design
entity prime(case_impl) (Figure 7.2) and one instance of design entity
prime(mcase_impl) (Figure 7.9).6 All 16 input patterns are then applied to
both design entities. We compare the outputs using the inequality operator /=
which evaluates to true if isprime0 does not equal isprime1. The
comparison is done with respect to the underlying std_logic type. This type
includes special values that a VHDL simulator can use to indicate conditions
such as disconnected wires (e.g., ’U’ for uninitialized). Thus, using
std_logic and std_logic_vector can catch errors that might otherwise go
undetected if values are constrained to being either logic value one or zero.7
If the outputs of the design entities don’t match for any pattern, the variable
check is set equal to 1. After all cases have been tried, a PASS or FAIL is
indicated, depending on the value of check.

--- Page 228 ---
Figure 7.20. Go/no-go testbench that checks results using a second implementation of the prime
number design entity.
EXAMPLE 7.5 Thermometer code detector testbench
Write a VHDL testbench that simultaneously checks the design entities written for Examples 7.1–7.4.
Our testbench, shown in Figure 7.21, requires the user to check manually that the output of
therm(assign_impl) is correct. We use pass/fail testing to verify the other three entity instantiations,
comparing their outputs with the output of therm(assign_impl). The output with our test (Figure
7.22) confirms that our VHDL is correct.

--- Page 229 ---
Figure 7.21. Testbench to verify the four thermometer code detectors from Examples 7.1–7.4.

--- Page 230 ---
Figure 7.22. The output from the testbench of Figure 7.21. We must check manually whether each
output is correct.
7.3 EXAMPLE: A SEVEN-SEGMENT
DECODER
In this section we examine the design of a seven-segment decoder to
introduce the concepts of constant definitions, signal concatenation, and
checking with inverse functions.
A seven-segment display depicts a single decimal digit by illuminating a
subset of seven light-emitting segments. The segments are arranged in the
form of the numeral 8, as shown in the top part of Figure 7.23, numbered
from 0 to 6. A seven-segment decoder is a hardware block that accepts a
four-bit binary-coded input signal, bin(3 downto 0), and generates a seven-
bit output signal, segs(6 downto 0), that indicates which segments of a
seven-segment display should be illuminated to display the number encoded
by bin. For example, if the binary code for “4,” 0100, is input to a seven-
segment decoder, the output is 0110011, which indicates that segments 0, 1,
4, and 5 are illuminated to display a 4.

--- Page 231 ---
Figure 7.23. Defining the constants for the seven-segment decoder.
The first order of business in describing our seven-segment decoder is to
define ten constants that each describe which segments are illuminated to
display a particular numeral. Figure 7.23 illustrates how we can declare our
own package that serves this purpose. Specifically, it shows a package
declaration beginning with the VHDL keyword package, followed by an
identifier used to refer to the package and then the keyword is followed by
definitions for ten constants SS_0 through SS_9 and finally a component
declaration. We also define a constant SOFF which has a value of all zeros – a

--- Page 232 ---
blank display – in addition to a component declaration for our seven-
segment decoder. A package declaration is identified by the package
keyword followed by the name of the package (sseg_constants) followed
by the keyword is. We can use the constants and component declaration
from our sseg_constants package by writing “use
work.sseg_constants.all;” before the entity declaration of the design
entity where we wish to use them.
The constants are declared using the VHDL constant keyword. Each
constant declaration maps a constant name to a constant value and has a
type. For example, the constant named SS_4 is defined to have the seven-bit
string 0011001 as its value and type sseg_type. We define the type
sseg_type using the keyword subtype where we set it equal to
std_logic_vector(6 downto 0). Constants can also be declared within an
architecture body as follows:
architecture <architecture_identifier> of
<entity_name> is
<constant_declarations>
<signal_declarations>
begin
...
We choose to define our constants inside a package since we want to use
them in multiple design entities.
We define constants for two reasons. First, using constant names rather
than values makes our code more readable and easier to maintain. Second,
defining a constant allows us to change all uses of the constant by changing
a single value. For example, suppose we decide to drop the bottom segment
on the “9.” To do this, we would simply change the definition of SS_9 to be
0011000 rather than 0010000, and this change would propagate
automatically to every use of SS_9. Without the definition, we would have to
edit manually every use of the constant – and we would be likely to miss at
least one.
The constant definitions give another example of the syntax used to
describe numbers in VHDL (the syntax for numbers was described in
Section 7.1.2). In the constant definitions of Figure 7.23 all numbers are in
binary. The inverse seven-segment design entity in Figure 7.25 uses
hexadecimal numbers.

--- Page 233 ---
Now that we have defined the constants, writing the VHDL code for the
seven-segment decoder design entity sseg is straightforward. Along with the
standard packages we include our constant definitions with the line “use
work.sseg_constants.all;”. As shown in Figure 7.24, we use a case
statement to describe the truth table of the design entity, just as we did for
the prime number function in Section 7.1.2. The output values are defined
using our defined constants. It is much easier to read this code with the
mnemonic constant names than if the right side of the case statement were
all bit strings of 1s and 0s. When an input value is not in the range 0–9, the
sseg design entity outputs SOFF.
Figure 7.24. Seven-segment decoder implemented with a case statement.

--- Page 234 ---
To aid in testing our seven-segment decoder, we will also define an
inverse seven-segment decoder design entity as shown in Figure 7.25.
Design entity invsseg accepts a seven-bit input string segs. If the input is
one of the ten codes defined in Figure 7.23, the circuit outputs the
corresponding binary code on output bin and a “1” on output valid. If the
input is SOFF, which is declared as all zeros (corresponding to the output of
the decoder when the input is out of range), the output is valid = 0, bin =
0. If the input is any other code, the output is valid = 0, bin = 1. Again,
our inverse seven-segment decoder uses a case statement to describe a truth
table. In this case there are two outputs of the truth table corresponding to
valid and bin.


--- Page 235 ---
Figure 7.25. VHDL description of an inverse seven-segment decoder, used to check the output of the
seven-segment decoder.
Now that we have defined the seven-segment decoder design entity sseg
and its inverse design entity invsseg, we can write a testbench that uses the
inverse design entity to check the functionality of the decoder itself. Figure
7.26 shows the testbench. The testbench instantiates the decoder and its
inverse. The decoder accepts input bin_in and generates output segs. The
inverse circuit accepts segs and generates outputs valid and bin_out.

--- Page 236 ---
Figure 7.26. Testbench for the seven-segment decoder using the inverse function to test the output.
After instantiating and connecting the design entities, the testbench
contains a for loop that loops through the 16 possible inputs. For inputs

--- Page 237 ---
that are in range (between 0 and 9), it checks that bin_in = bin_out and
that valid is 1. If these two conditions don’t hold, an error is flagged.
Similarly, for inputs that are out of range it checks that bin_out and valid
are both zero.
Using an inverse design entity to check the functionality of a
combinational design entity is a common technique in writing testbenches. It
is particularly useful in checking arithmetic circuits (see Chapter 10). For
example, in writing a testbench for a square-root unit, we can square the
result (a much simpler operation) and check that we get the original value.
The use of an inverse design entity in a testbench is also an example of the
more general technique of using checking modules. Checking modules in
testbenches are like assertions in software. They are redundant logic that is
inserted to check invariants, conditions that we know should always be true
(e.g., two modules should not drive the bus at the same time). Because the
checking modules are in the testbench, they cost us nothing. They are not
included in the synthesized logic and consume zero chip area. However, they
are invaluable in detecting bugs during simulation.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to write VHDL descriptions of
combinational logic functions. A truth table can be directly converted to a
VHDL case statement:
process(input)
begin
case input is
when x"1" | x"2" | x"3" | x"5" | x"7" | x"b" | x"d" =>
isprime <= ’1’;
when others => isprime <= ’0’;
end case;
end process;
Here, we use one case to handle all input combinations where the output is 1,
and the default case makes the function 0 elsewhere. The VHDL case?
statement is like the case statement, but it allows our cases to include -s
(don’t cares) in some of the bits. It is most useful for specifying functions

--- Page 238 ---
where a particular pattern on some input bits makes the remaining input bits
irrelevant.
The VHDL concurrent assignment statement allows us to write a logic
equation directly as in
majority <= (a AND b) OR (a AND c) or (b AND c) ;
A VHDL logic function can be encapsulated in a design entity. A design
entity is composed of an entity declaration followed by an architecture
body declaration. The entity declaration includes a list of input and output
signals in a port declaration. Larger functions can then instantiate design
entities and connect the output of one design entity to the input of another by
connecting them to the same signal.
We verify a VHDL design entity by writing a testbench for that design
entity. Unlike a design entity, which is ultimately synthesized into hardware,
a testbench is not synthesized and is written in a different style of VHDL. A
testbench instantiates the design entity being tested, declares the input and
output signals of the design entity, and then specifies a series of test patterns
within a process statement. Ideally, a testbench verifies proper behavior and
gives a pass/fail indication. We will discuss verification in more detail in
Chapter 20.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
More information about VHDL can be found in Ashenden The Designer’s
Guide to VHDL [3] or one of many other textbooks on the language. Several
good VHDL references are available online.
Exercises
7.1 Fibonacci: case. Write a VHDL description for a circuit that accepts a
four-bit input and outputs true if the input is a Fibonacci number (0, 1,
2, 3, 5, 8, or 13). Your implementation must be done via a case
statement.
7.2 Fibonacci: circuit: concurrent signal assignment. Write a VHDL
description for a circuit that accepts a four-bit input and outputs true if
the input is a Fibonacci number (0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, or 13). Your

--- Page 239 ---
implementation must be done via a concurrent assignment statement
using a minimized logic function.
7.3 Fibonacci: circuit: structural. Write a VHDL description for a circuit
that accepts a four-bit input and outputs true if the input is a Fibonacci
number (0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, or 13). Your implementation must be done via
structural VHDL, directly instantiating AND and OR gates. You will
need to write separate AND and OR design entities.
7.4 Fibonacci: testbench. Write a testbench and verify that your design
entities from Exercises 7.1–7.3 all work correctly. Which of the four
design entities did you find easiest to write and maintain?
7.5 Fibonacci: logic synthesis. Use a synthesis tool to synthesize the
Fibonacci circuits you wrote in Exercises 7.1–7.3. Draw the resulting
logic diagram for each synthesis outputs circuit. Compare and contrast
the output circuits from each design entity.
7.6 Five-bit prime number circuit. Write a VHDL description for a circuit
that accepts a five-bit input and outputs true if the input is a prime
number (2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, or 31). Describe why the
approach you chose (case, concurrent assignment, structural) is the
right approach.
7.7 Multiple-of-3 circuit. Write a VHDL description for a circuit that
accepts a four-bit input and outputs true if the input is a multiple of 3
(3, 6, 9, 12, or 15). Describe why the approach you chose (case,
concurrent assignment, structural) is the right approach.
7.8 Testbench. Write a VHDL testbench for the multiple-of-3 circuit of
Exercise 7.7.
7.9 Decimal Fibonacci circuit. Write a VHDL description for a circuit that
accepts a four-bit input that is guaranteed to be in the range 0–9 and
outputs true if the input is a Fibonacci number (0, 1, 2, 3, 5, or 8). The
output is a don’t care for input states 10–15. Describe why the
approach you chose (case, concurrent assignment, structural) is the
right approach.
7.10Multiple-of-5 circuit. Write a VHDL description for a circuit that
outputs true if its five-bit input is a multiple of 5.
7.11 Square circuit. Write a VHDL description for a circuit that outputs true
if its eight-bit input is a square number, i.e., 1, 4, 9, ....
7.12Cube circuit. Write a VHDL description for a circuit that outputs true if
its eight-bit input is a cube, i.e., 1, 8, 27, 64, ....

--- Page 240 ---
7.13Bit reversal: case. Write a VHDL design entity that takes a five-bit
input, input, and outputs a five-bit value that is equal to the input with
its bits reversed. For example, input 01100 gives output 00110, and
input 11110 gives output 01111. You must implement your design
entity using a case statement.
7.14Bit reversal: assign. Write a VHDL design entity that takes a five-bit
input, input, and outputs a five-bit value that is equal to the input with
its bits reversed. For example, input 01100, gives output 00110 and
input 11110 gives output 01111. You must implement your design
entity using a single concurrent assignment statement. You will need to
use the concatenation operator.
7.15Next Fibonacci number, I. Write a VHDL design entity that takes in a
four-bit input and outputs a five-bit number representing the next
Fibonacci number. The mappings of inputs to outputs are as follows:
You may assume that the input is a legal Fibonacci number and output
don’t cares (’-’) if the input is not valid. Remember that if you do not
test your circuit, it does not work. For the sake of this problem (and
Exercises 7.16 and 7.17) we are ignoring the leading 0, 1 of the
Fibonacci sequence and using only 1, 2, 3, 5, ....
7.16Next Fibonacci number, II. Modify your Fibonacci circuit of Exercise
7.15 to include an output signal valid that is 1 when the input is a
valid Fibonacci number and 0 when it is not. Your design entity should
still also output the next five-bit number.
7.17Next Fibonacci number, III. Modify your Fibonacci circuit of Exercise
7.16 to include two new inputs: rst and ivalid. If rst is equal to 1,
then your design entity outputs (both valid and the next number) must
be 0. If ivalid is 0, then the output valid signal must be 0, regardless

--- Page 241 ---
of the input number. If rst is 0 and ivalid is 1, then the circuit works
as described in Exercise 7.16. Your logic should be implemented in a
case? statement with no more than eight statements and a default.
7.18FPGA implementation. Use an FPGA mapping tool (such as Altera
Quartus or Xilinx Foundation) to map the seven-segment decoder of
Figure 7.24 to an FPGA. Use the floorplanning tools to view the layout
of the FPGA. How many CLBs did the synthesis use?
7.19Seven-segment decoder. Modify the seven-segment decoder to output
the characters “A” through “F” (lowercase “b” and “d”) for input states
10 to 15, respectively.
7.20Inverse seven-segment decoder. Modify the inverse seven-segment
decoder to accept two possible codes for “9,” either "1111011" or
"1110011"– i.e., with the bottom segment (segment 3) on or off.
7.21Testbench. Modify the testbench of Figure 7.18 to check the output and
indicate only pass or fail for the test.
7.22Case multiplication. Write a VHDL design entity using a case
statement that takes two two-bit numbers and outputs a four-bit
number that is the product of the inputs (e.g., 102 × 112 = 01102). You
will learn how to design a real multiplier in Chapters 10–12.
7.23Find-first-one. A find-first-one unit will detect and output the bit
position of the most significant 1 in an input. Write the VHDL, using a
case? statement, to implement a find-first-one that takes a 16-bit input
and outputs a four-bit signal that notes the position of the first 1. Also
include an output that is 1 if there are no 1s in the input. Test your
circuit. We discuss a different implementation of this circuit in Chapter
8.
7.24Factorization circuit. Write a VHDL description for a circuit that takes
a four-bit input input and produces outputs two, three, five,
seven, eleven, and thirteen. A given output is high if the number
corresponding to the output evenly divides the input. For example,
when the input is 6, outputs two and three are high and the other
outputs are low.
1 Using the direction buffer used to be discouraged in favor of declaring a separate internal signal
that is copied to the output. With recent CAD tools and especially when using VHDL-2008,
declaring an extra internal signal is no longer required.
2 VHDL-2008 actually removes this confusing restriction, but as of early 2015 few CAD tools have
implemented the change.

--- Page 242 ---
3 Technically, the for-loop statement is synthesizable, but its use is discouraged. While some forms
of wait statement are synthesizable, a wait with a “timeout clause,” such as the one in the above test
script, is ignored during synthesis.
4 Prior to VHDL-2008 converting std_logic_vector values to strings was more complicated.
5 It is common practice to rerun a large test suite on an entire design on a periodic basis (e.g., every
night). This regression testing catches many errors that result from the unintended consequences of
making a change to one part of the design on a different, and often distant, part.
6 In this example, there is little advantage to comparing these two implementations, since they are of
roughly the same complexity. In other situations, however, there is often a very simple non-
synthesizable description that can be used for comparison.
7 For example, using the VHDL types bit and bit_vector.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 243 ---
8
Combinational building blocks
A relatively small number of modules, decoders, multiplexers, encoders,
etc., are used repeatedly in digital designs. These building blocks are the
idioms of modern digital design. Often, we design a module by
composing a number of these building blocks to realize the desired
function, rather than writing its truth table and directly synthesizing a
logical implementation.
In the 1970s and 1980s most digital systems were built from small
integrated circuits that each contained one of these building block
functions. The popular 7400 series of TTL logic [106], for example,
contained many multiplexers and decoders. During that period, the art of
digital design largely consisted of selecting the right building blocks from
the TTL databook and assembling them into modules. Today, with most
logic implemented as ASICs or FPGAs, we are not constrained by what
building blocks are available in the TTL databook. However, the basic
building blocks are still quite useful elements from which to build a
system.
8.1 MULTI-BIT NOTATION
Throughout this book we use bus notation in figures to denote multi-bit
signals with a single line. For example, in Figure 8.1, we represent the eight-
bit signal b7:0 with a single line. The diagonal slash across the signal
indicates that this line represents a multi-bit signal. The number “8” below
the slash indicates that the width of the bus is eight bits.

--- Page 244 ---
Figure 8.1. We denote a multi-bit signal or a bus with a diagonal slash across the signal labeled with
the width of the bus. We select (possibly overlapping) individual signals and subfields from a multi-bit
signal using diagonal connectors labeled with the bit or subfield being extracted.
Single bits and subfields are selected from a multi-bit signal using
diagonal connectors, as shown for bits b7 and b5, and the three-bit subfield
b5:3. Each diagonal connector is labeled with the bits being selected. The bit
selections may overlap – as is the case with b5 and b5:3. The subfield b5:3 is
itself a multi-bit signal and is labeled accordingly – with a slash and the
number “3.”
8.2 DECODERS
In general, a decoder converts symbols from one code to another. We have
already seen an example of a binary to seven-segment decoder in Section
7.3. When used by itself, however, the term decoder means a binary to one-
hot decoder. That converts a symbol from a binary code (each bit pattern
represents a symbol) to a one-hot code (at most one bit can be high at a time
and each bit represents a symbol). In Section 8.4 we will discuss encoders
that reverse this process. That is, they are one-hot to binary decoders.
The schematic symbol for an n → m decoder is shown in Figure 8.2. Input
signal a is an n-bit binary signal and output signal b is an m-bit (m ≤ 2n) one-
hot signal. A truth table for a 3→ 8 decoder is shown in Table 8.1. If we
think of both the input and the output as binary numbers, then, if the input
has value i, the output has value 2i.


--- Page 245 ---
Figure 8.2. Schematic symbol for an n → m decoder.
Table 8.1. Truth table for a 3 → 8 decoder: the decoder converts a three-bit binary input, bin, to
an eight-bit one-hot output, ohout
bin ohout
000 00000001
001 00000010
010 00000100
011 00001000
100 00010000
101 00100000
110 01000000
111 10000000
A VHDL description of an n → m decoder is shown in Figure 8.3. This
design entity introduces the use of VHDL generic constants. The design
entity uses generic constants n and m to allow this single design entity to be
used to instantiate component decoders of arbitrary input and output width.
In the entity declaration description, the statement n : integer := 2; after
the keyword generic declares that n (the input signal width) is an integer
constant with a default value of 2. Similarly, m (the output signal width) is an
integer constant with a default value of 4.

--- Page 246 ---
Figure 8.3. VHDL description of an n to m decoder.
If we instantiate the component as usual, it will be created with the default
values for all generic constants. For example, the following code creates a 2
→ 4 decoder since the default values are n=2 and m=4:
Dec24: Dec port map(x,y);
Here x and y are signals (declaration not shown) that connect to input a and
output b via positional association.
We can override the default generic constant values when we instantiate a
component. The general form for such a parameterized component
instantiation is given by
<instance_label>: <component_identifier> generic
map(<assoc_list>) port map(<assoc_list>);
For example, to instantiate a 3 → 8 decoder, the appropriate VHDL code is
given by

--- Page 247 ---
Dec38: Dec generic map(n=>3, m=>8) port map(a=>x,b=>y);
Here generic map(n=>3, m=>8) sets n=3 and m=8 (using named association)
for this instance of the Dec component with instance label Dec38. We can
also use positional association:
Dec38b: Dec generic map(3,8) port map(x,y);
where generic map(3,8) sets n=3 and m=8 (using positional association) for
another instance of the Dec component with instance label Dec38b. Similarly,
a 4→10 decoder is created with
Dec410: Dec generic map(4,10) port map(x,y);
Note that the output width m need not be equal to 2n for input width n. In
many cases (where not all input states occur) it is useful to instantiate
decoders that have less than full-width outputs. The design entity of Figure
8.3 uses the left shift operator1 “sll” to shift a 1 over to the position
specified by binary input a to create one-hot output b. An alternative to
writing “one sll shift”istowrite“shift_left(one,shift)”.
A small decoder is constructed using an AND gate to generate each
output, as shown for a 2 → 4 decoder in Figure 8.4. Each input is
complemented by an inverter. An AND gate for each output then selects the
true or complement for each input to form the product corresponding to that
output. Output b1, for example, is generated by an AND gate with inputs a0
and a1,so b1 = a0 ∧  a1.


--- Page 248 ---
Figure 8.4. Schematic of a 2 → 4 decoder. An array of inverters creates the complements of the inputs
and an array of AND gates generate the outputs.
Large decoders can be constructed from small decoders, as shown for a 6
→ 64 decoder in Figure 8.5. The six-bit input a5:0 is divided into three two-
bit fields, and each is decoded by a 2:4 decoder generating three four-bit
signals x, y, and z. In effect, this predecoding stage converts the six-digit
binary input into a three-digit quaternary (base 4) input. Each of the four-bit
signals x, y, and z represents one quaternary number. Each bit of the one-hot
representation of the quaternary number corresponds to a particular value –
0, 1, 2, or 3. The 64 outputs are generated by 64 three-input AND gates that
combine one bit from each of the quaternary digits. The AND gate for output
bi selects the bits that correspond to the quaternary representation of the
output number, i. For example, output b27 (not shown) combines x1, y2, and
z3 because 2710 = 1234.
Figure 8.5. Schematic of a 6 → 64 decoder. Three 2 → 4 decoders predecode each pair of input bits
into three four-bit one-hot signals, x, y, and z. An array of 64 three-input AND gates generates the
outputs using these predecoded signals.
Building a large decoder using predecoders as shown in Figure 8.5
reduces logical effort (see Section 5.3) by factoring a large AND gate into
two stages of smaller AND gates. For the 6:64 decoder in Figure 8.5, a six-
input AND gate would be required to realize the decoder in a single stage.
The implementation with 2:4 predecoders replaces the six-input AND gate

--- Page 249 ---
with three two-input AND gates (one in each predecoder) followed by a
three-input AND gate. Efficiency is also gained by sharing the two-input
AND gates across several outputs. In the figure, each two-input AND gate
(each predecoder output) is shared across 16 outputs (one for each
combination of the other two quaternary digits).
The design of a large decoder is a compromise between wiring density
and logical efficiency. A single-level n → 2n decoder requires 2n wiring
tracks to run the inputs and their complements to all 2n AND gates. Using
2:4 predecoders requires exactly the same number of wires, since the four
wires required to carry two binary bits and their complements are replaced
by a four-wire one-hot quaternary digit. This is clearly a win because the
fan-in of the output gates is halved without any increase in wire tracks.
Moreover, power is reduced since at most two of the bits of the quaternary
signal change state (one up, one down) each time the input is changed, while
all four wires of the true/complement binary signal may change state.
Going from 2:4 to 3:8 predecoders involves more of a tradeoff. The
number of wiring tracks increases by 33% (from 2n to 8n/3) in exchange for
reducing the fan-in of the output gates by 33% (from n/2 ton/3). This is still
usually a good trade. However, larger predecoders (e.g., 4:16) are rarely used
because of the excessive number of wiring tracks required. An i-input
predecoder requires 2in/i wiring tracks and (n/i)-input AND gates.
For very large decoders, the upper digits of the predecoder are often
distributed to eliminate the need to run all output wires across the entire
AND gate array. In Figure 8.5 (which is not really a very large decoder), for
example, we could distribute the four AND gates of the predecoder that
generate x3:0 so that the AND gate that generates x0 is next to the output
AND gates that generate b15:0, and the AND gate that generates x1 is next to
the AND gates that generate b31:16, and so on. For wide input decoders,
distributing decoders in this manner reduces wiring tracks. When the second
most significant decoder is distributed, it is typically repeated for each
output of the most significant decoder – negating some of the gate-sharing
advantage of predecoding to reduce wiring complexity.
An n → 2n decoder can be used to build an arbitrary n-input logic
function. The decoder generates all 2n minterms of n inputs. An OR gate can
be used to combine the minterms that are implicants of the function to be
implemented. For example, Figure 8.6 shows how a three-bit prime number

--- Page 250 ---
function can be realized with a 3:8 decoder. The decoder generates all eight
minterms b7:0. An OR gate combines the minterms b1, b2, b3, b5, and b7 that
are implicants of the function.
Figure 8.6. Three-bit prime-or-one number function implemented with a 3:8 decoder.
A VHDL design entity that describes a three-bit prime number function
using a decoder in this manner is shown in Figure 8.7. While it would be
inefficient to implement the prime number function in this manner, it is a
very compact and readable way to describe the function – it is very close to
the notation f = ∑m(1, 2, 3, 5, 7), and a good synthesizer will reduce this
description to efficient logic.
Figure 8.7. VHDL design entity that implements the three-bit prime number function using a 3:8
decoder.

--- Page 251 ---
Note that to reuse the decoder VHDL from Figure 8.3 in our prime
number circuit in Figure 8.7 we must either use a component declaration or
use the direct instantiation syntax introduced in Section 7.2. It is generally
preferrable to use a component declaration for synthesizable code because it
allows us to change the binding later using a configuration declaration like
that illustrated in Section 7.1.8. We could put the component declaration in
the architecture body for Primed, as we have seen earlier (e.g., Figure 7.13).
However, for frequently used components such as the combinational
building blocks introduced in this chapter, it saves time and reduces VHDL
code size to instead group the component declarations into a package.
Hence, in Figure 8.7 and future examples we reference a package called
“ch8” that includes a component declaration for each entity in this chapter.
Such a package can be declared using the syntax introduced in Section 7.3
and illustrated in Figure 7.23. The VHDL code for the ch8 package and
similar packages used in subsequent chapters is included alongside the
VHDL examples available on the website for this book.
EXAMPLE 8.1 Large decoder
Write a VHDL design entity that implements a 4 → 16 decoder using the 2 → 4 decoderasa building
block.
The VHDL is shown in Figure 8.8. We use the hierarchical scheme shown in Figure 8.5. We first
instantiate two 2 → 4 decoders, d0 and d1, that decode the high and low halves of a to produce four-
bit one-hot signals x and y. The inputs to the decoders use the VHDL slice notation to select a subset
of bits from a bus (e.g., a(1 downto 0) selects the low-order two-bit fields from a). We then AND
each bit of y with all of x to produce each four-bit field of b. Our design entity uses VHDL array
aggregate notation to replicate bits of y. Both the array aggregate and slice syntax are discussed
further in Section 8.3.

--- Page 252 ---
Figure 8.8. Implementation of a 4 → 16 decoder using two 2 → 4 decoders and 16 AND gates.
8.3 MULTIPLEXERS
Figure 8.9 shows the schematic symbol for a k-bit n → 1 multiplexer. This
circuit accepts n distinct k-bit wide input data signals a0, ..., an−1 and an n-bit
one-hot select signal s. The circuit selects the input signal ai that corresponds
to the high bit of s and outputs this value of ai on the single k-bit wide output
signal, b. In effect, the multiplexer acts as a k-pole n-throw switch to select
one of the n input data signals under control of the select signal.


--- Page 253 ---
Figure 8.9. Schematic symbol for a k-bit n → 1 multiplexer.
Multiplexers are commonly used in digital systems as data selectors. For
example, a multiplexer on the input of an ALU (see Section 18.6) selects the
source of data to feed the ALU, another selects an ALU’s output, and a
multiplexer on the address lines of a RAM selects the data source to provide
a memory address each cycle.
Figure 8.10 shows two implementations of a one-bit 4:1 multiplexer. The
implementation shown in Figure 8.10(a) uses AND and OR gates. Each data
input ai is ANDed with its corresponding select bit si, and the outputs of the
ANDs are ORed together. Because the select signal is one-hot, only the
select bit si corresponding to the selected input is true; the output of this
AND gate will be ai, and the output of all other AND gates will be zero.
Thus the output of the OR will be the selected input, ai. An alternative
design using tri-state buffers is shown in Figure 8.10(b). A tri-state buffer
(see Section 4.3.4) is a logic circuit with output equal to its data input (left
input) if its control input (bottom input) is high, and disconnected (open
circuit) if the control input is low. The high bit of the select input si enables
one of the tri-state buffers to transmit ai to the output; all other tri-state
buffers are disabled – effectively disconnected from the output. The
advantage of the tri-state implementation is that it can be distributed, with
each buffer placed near its corresponding data source, and with only a single
output line connecting the tri-state buffers (Exercise 8.7 asks you to build
this structure out of CMOS logic gates). The AND/OR implementation, on
the other hand, is more difficult to distribute because of the wiring required
to connect to the final OR.


--- Page 254 ---
Figure 8.10. Schematic of a 4 → 1 multiplexer. (a) Using AND and OR gates. (b) Using tri-state
buffers.
A VHDL description of an arbitrary-width 3:1 multiplexer is shown in
Figure 8.11. This design entity takes three k-bit data inputs, a0, a1, and a2,
and a three-bit one-hot select input s, and generates a k-bit output b. The
implementation uses a concurrent signal assignment statement that matches
the gate implementation of Figure 8.10(a), with two differences. First, since
this is a three-input multiplexer, there are three ANDs rather than four.
Second, and more importantly, since this multiplexer is k-bits wide, each
AND is k-bits wide – that is, k copies of a two-input AND.
Figure 8.11. VHDL description of an arbitrary-width 3 → 1 multiplexer.
To feed each bit of the select signal, e.g., s(0), into a k-bit-wide AND
gate, it must first be replicated to make a k-bit-wide signal, each bit of which
is s(0). This is accomplished using VHDL array aggregate notation to
perform signal replication. Writing (k-1 downto 0 => x) makes k copies of
signal x concatenated end-to-end. Thus, in this design entity we make k
copies of select bit 0, s(0), by writing (k-1 downto 0 => s(0)).
The std_logic_vector type is an example of a VHDL array type.
Specifically, std_logic_vector is an array of elements of type std_logic.
As shown above, one way to specify an array value is to use array aggregate
notation. The syntax we employed above for forming an array aggregate was

--- Page 255 ---
(<range_specification> => <expression>)
Here <range_specification> can be a discrete range such as k-1 downto
0 or the keyword others, and <expression> can be either a signal or a
constant.
An alternative VHDL description of the 3:1 multiplexer using a case
statement is given in Figure 8.12. This description is equivalent to that of
Figure 8.11 for the cases where s is a one-hot signal, but is easier to read and
understand. For the default case alternative, “when others =>”, we use an
array aggregate, “(others => ’-’)”, to specify a k-bit-wide
std_logic_vector value. The use of others for the range specification in
the array aggregate indicates that all elements of the array take on the don’t
care value (’-’). The width of (others => ’-’) will be inferred to match
the width signal b which is assigned to. We use this form rather than a bit
string literal as the width of signal b can be changed by assigning a different
value for generic parameter k which can be modified using a generic map
clause during component instantiation.
Figure 8.12. VHDL description of an arbitrary-width 3 → 1 multiplexer using a case statement.

--- Page 256 ---
A third alternative using a selected signal assignment is shown in Figure
8.13.2
Figure 8.13. VHDL description of an arbitrary-width 3 → 1 multiplexer using a selected signal
assignment statement. Note entity declaration is in Figure 8.12.
Most standard-cell libraries provide multiplexers with one-hot select
signals, and in most cases this is what we want – because our select signal is
already in one-hot form. However, in some cases, it is desirable to have a
multiplexer with a binary select signal. This may be because our select
signal is in binary rather than one-hot form, or because we have to transmit
our select signal over a long distance (or through a narrow pin interface) and
want to economize on wiring.
Figure 8.14(a) shows the symbol for a binary-select multiplexer. This
circuit takes an m = ⌈ log2 n⌉  bit binary select signal, sb, and selects one of
the n input signals according to the binary value of sb – i.e., if sb = i,then ai
is selected.
Figure 8.14. Binary-select multiplexer. (a) A k-bit-wide n → 1 binary-select multiplexer selects input
ai,wherei is the value of m-bit-wide binary select signal sb. (b) We can implement the binary-select
multiplexer using a decoder and a normal (one-hot select) multiplexer.

--- Page 257 ---
We can implement a binary-select multiplexer using two blocks that we
have already designed, as shown in Figure 8.14(b). We use an m → n
decoder to decode binary select signal sb into a one-hot select signal s and
then use a normal multiplexer (with one-hot select) to select the desired
input.
The VHDL description of a k-bit wide 3:1 binary-select multiplexer is
shown in Figure 8.15. The description exactly matches that shown in Figure
8.14(b). A 2:3 decoder is instantiated to convert a two-bit binary select sb to
a three-bit one-hot select s. The one-hot select is then used in a normal (one-
hot select) 3:1 multiplexer to select the desired input.
Figure 8.15. VHDL description of a binary-select 3:1 multiplexer using a decoder and a normal
multiplexer.
A schematic for a 4:1 binary-select multiplexer is shown in Figure 8.16.
Each two-input AND gate at the decoder output has been combined with the
two-input AND gate at the multiplexer input to form a single three-input
AND gate. This fused implementation is more efficient than literally
combining the two components. However, a VHDL description that
combines two components, as in Figure 8.15, does not necessarily result in
an inefficient implementation. A good synthesis program will generate a

--- Page 258 ---
very efficient gate-level implementation from such a description. Again, the
goal of the VHDL description is to be readable, maintainable, and
synthesizable – optimization should be left to the synthesis tools.
Figure 8.16. Schematic of a 4 → 1 binary-select multiplexer.
VHDL descriptions of a binary-select multiplexer using case and selected
signal assignment statements are shown in Figures 8.17 and 8.18,
respectively. These are behavioral descriptions of the multiplexer, as
opposed to the structural description in Figure 8.15, and are easier to read.
Figure 8.17. VHDL description of a binary-select multiplexer using a case statement. Note entity
declaration is in Figure 8.15.

--- Page 259 ---
Figure 8.18. VHDL description of a binary-select multiplexer using a selected signal assignment
statement. Note entity declaration is in Figure 8.15.
A common design error is to use a binary-select multiplexer in a situation
where the select signal is originally in one-hot form (e.g., the output of an
arbiter that determines which bidder gets access to a shared resource). All
too often a designer takes such a one-hot select signal and encodes it into
binary (see Section 8.4) only to decode it back to one-hot in the multiplexer.
Such gratuitous encoding and decoding wastes chip area, burns power, and
complicates the VHDL description. Many designers overuse binary-select
multiplexers because they equate multiplexer with binary-select multiplexer.
Don’t do this. A basic multiplexer has a one-hot select input. If you have a
one-hot select signal, leave it that way.
We can combine several small one-hot select multiplexers to build a larger
multiplexer by ORing their outputs together. The large one-hot select vector
is then divided over the small multiplexers. The select signal for most of the
multiplexers will be all zeros, giving a zero output. Only the small
multiplexer with the selected input gets a one-hot select signal, which
enables the selected input to propagate all the way to the output. For
example, Figure 8.19 shows how a 6:1 multiplexer can be constructed from
two 3:1 multiplexers. Note that for this ORing of small multiplexers to work,
each small multiplexer must output a zero when its select input comprises all
zeros. This may not be the case for tri-state multiplexers (Figure 8.10(b)) or
with the don’t care conditions in Figures 8.12 and 8.13.

--- Page 260 ---
Figure 8.19. Six-input multiplexer created by ORing the output of two three-input multiplexers.
In Figure 8.19 the select inputs to the 3:1 multiplexers use the VHDL slice
notation to select a subset of bits from a bus (e.g., s(2 downto 0) selects the
low-order three-bit fields from s). The syntax we used is
<array_signal_name>( <discrete_range> )
where <array_signal_name> is the name of a signal with array type (e.g.,
std_logic_ vector) and <discrete_range> is an expression giving a range
of index values such as “2 downto 0” or“8 to 15”. The direction (i.e.,
downto or to) of the slice must match the direction in the signal’s
declaration.
A large binary multiplexer is constructed as a tree of multiplexers as
shown in Figure 8.20. The figure shows a 16:1 multiplexer constructed from
five 4:1 multiplexers. A single 4:1 multiplexer at the output uses the most
significant bits (MSBs) of the select signal s3:2 to select between the four
four-bit input groups. Within each input group, the least significant bits
(LSBs) of the select signal s1:0 select one of the four inputs in that group. For
example, to select input a11, the select input is set to 1011, the binary code
for 11. The MSBs are 10, which selects the x2 input on the output
multiplexer and hence the signal group from a8 toa11. The LSBs are 11,

--- Page 261 ---
which selects a11 from within this group. One downside of this tree
multiplexer structure, as compared with the one-hot approach of Figure 8.19,
is that if the LSBs of the select signal switch, all four of the x3:0 signals
switch, and so dissipate energy, even though only one is needed.
Figure 8.20. A large binary-select multiplexer is constructed from a tree of smaller binary-select
multiplexers.
An arbitrary n-input combinational logic function can be implemented
using a binary-select 2n → 1 multiplexer by placing the truth table of the
function on the inputs of the multiplexer. The binary select input of the
multiplexer acts as the input to the logic function and selects the appropriate
entry of the truth table. This is shown in Figure 8.21(a) for the three-bit
prime number function. We can actually realize any n-input logic function
using only a 2n−1-input multiplexer by factoring the function about the last
input. This is shown for the three-bit prime number function in Figure
8.21(b). In effect, we split the truth table into two pieces – for sb2 = 0 and
sb2 = 1. For each combination of the remaining inputs sb1:0 we compare the
two truth table halves. If the truth table is 0 (1) in both halves, we put a 0 (1)

--- Page 262 ---
on the corresponding multiplexer input. However, if the function is 0 (1)
when sb2 = 0 and 1 (0) when sb2 = 1, we put sb2 (sb2) on the corresponding
multiplexer input.
Figure 8.21. Combinational logic functions can be directly implemented with binary-select
multiplexers. (a) The three-bit prime number function is implemented using an 8:1 binary-select
multiplexer. (b) The same function is realized with a 4:1 binary-select multiplexer.
A VHDL design entity that implements the three-bit prime number
function using a multiplexer is shown in Figure 8.22. The 2n-input
multiplexer implementation is chosen because it is easier to write, read, and
maintain. Again, we leave the low-level optimization to the synthesis tools.
Figure 8.22. VHDL description of the three-bit prime number function implemented using an 8:1
binary-select multiplexer with its data inputs set to the prime number truth table.

--- Page 263 ---
8.4 ENCODERS
The schematic symbol for an encoder, a logic module that converts a one-hot
input signal into a binary-encoded output signal, is shown in Figure 8.23. An
encoder is the inverse function of a decoder. It accepts an n-bit one-hot
signal and generates an m = ⌈ log2 n⌉  bit binary output signal. The encoder
will work properly only if its input signal is one-hot.
Figure 8.23. Schematic symbol for an n → m encoder that converts an n-bit one-hot signal to an m =
⌈ log2 n⌉  bit binary signal.
An encoder is implemented with an OR gate for each output as shown in
Figure 8.24 for a 4:2 encoder. Each OR gate has as inputs all of those one-
hot input bits that correspond to binary numbers with that output set. In
Figure 8.24, for example, output b1 is true for binary codes 2 and 3. Hence it
combines one-hot input bits a2 and a3.
Figure 8.24. Schematic of a 4 → 2 encoder.
A VHDL design entity for a 4:2 encoder described using a logic equation
is shown in Figure 8.25. This description follows the schematic shown in
Figure 8.24. The two-bit output signal b is assigned in a single statement
using the concatenation operator ‘&’ to combine two separate logic
equations, one for each bit of b. We have seen the concatenation operator
applied to strings in our testbench scripts (e.g., Figures 3.8, 7.18, 7.21, and
7.26). Here we apply the concatenation operator to two expressions, (a(3)
or a(2)) and (a(3) or a(1)), each of which produces a value of type
std_logic. The result of this concatenation operation is a

--- Page 264 ---
std_logic_vector of length two that can be assigned to the output b. The
line “b <= (a(3) or a(2)) & (a(3) or a(1));” is equivalent to, but more
compact than, writing
Figure 8.25. VHDL description of a 4:2 encoder.
b(1) <= a(3) or a(2);
b(0) <= a(3) or a(1);
The leftmost bit in the concatenation expression, “(a(3) or a(2))”, is
assigned to the leftmost bit of the signal b irrespective of the index value for
the leftmost bit. We put parentheses around “(a(3) or a(2))”and“(a(3)
or a(1))” since concatenation (&)has higher precedence than the logical
operator or. We can also use the concatenation operator on
std_logic_vector values.
For comparison, a behavioral VHDL description of the same module is
shown in Figure 8.26. This design entity has the same behavior as that of
Figure 8.25 when the input is one-hot. For other non-zero inputs, the
behavioral design entity sets the output to a don’t care state (’-’) while the
logical design entity generates an output by ORing together the input bits.
The behavioral description is preferred – both to detect the illegal input state
during simulation and to give the synthesizer the freedom to exploit the
don’t cares to minimize the resulting logic.

--- Page 265 ---
Figure 8.26. Behavioral VHDL description of a 4:2 encoder.
We have coded this encoder to output 0 when the input comprises all
zeros. This facilitates construction of large encoders from multiple small
encoders as described below. If this feature is not needed, the zero line can
be deleted from the case statement.
A large encoder can be constructed from a tree of smaller encoders, as
shown in Figure 8.27. The figure shows a 16:4 encoder constructed from 4:2
encoders. To allow this composition, a summary output must be added to
each 4:2 encoder. This output is true if any input of the encoder is true. The
LSBs of the output are generated by ORing together3 the outputs of the 4:2
encoders connected directly to the inputs. The MSBs of the outputs are
generated by an additional 4:2 encoder that encodes the summary outputs of
the input encoders. The summary output of this final encoder (not shown)
could be used as a summary output of the entire 16:4 encoder. Still larger
encoders can be constructed by building additional levels on the tree.

--- Page 266 ---
Figure 8.27. Large encoders can be constructed from a tree of smaller encoders. Each small encoder
requires an additional output that indicates whether any of its inputs are true.
To understand how the tree encoder works, consider the case where input
a9 is true and all other inputs are false. The third (from the bottom) input
encoder has an input of 0010, and hence outputs 01, and sets its summary
output true. All other input encoders have zero inputs and hence generate 00
outputs. Since all other outputs are 00, the output of the third encoder passes
through the two OR gates to generate directly the two LSBs of the output,
b1:0 = 01. The MSB encoder has an input of 0100, since only the third
summary output is true. Hence it generates an output of b3:2 = 10, giving an
overall output of b3:0 = 1001, which is 9 in decimal.
VHDL code for the tree encoder is shown in Figure 8.28. In the code for
the 4:2 encoder with summary output Enc42a, the statement that generates
summary output c uses the function or_reduce(x) defined in
std_logic_misc. This function returns the result of ORing all of the bits of
signal x together.

--- Page 268 ---
Figure 8.28. VHDL code for a 16:4 encoder built as a tree of 4:2 encoders with a summary output
(component Enc42a). The summary output is true if any input of the design entity is true.
EXAMPLE 8.2 Thermometer encoder
Write a VHDL design entity that encodes a four-bit thermometer code to a binary number reflecting
the number of 1s in the code. The output should be specified as don’t care if the input is not a
thermometer code. See Figure 8.29.
Figure 8.29. VHDL for a thermometer to binary encoder.
8.5 ARBITERS AND PRIORITY ENCODERS
Figure 8.30 shows the schematic symbol for an arbiter, which is sometimes
called a find-first-one (FF1) unit. This circuit accepts an arbitrary input
signal and outputs a one-hot signal that has its sole 1 in the position of the
least significant 1 in the input signal. For example, if the input to an eight-bit
arbiter were 01011100, the output would be 00000100, since the least

--- Page 269 ---
significant 1 in the input is in bit 2. In some applications we reverse the
arbiter and look for the most significant 1. For the remainder of this section,
however, we focus on arbiters that look for the least significant 1 in the input
signal.
Figure 8.30. Schematic symbol for an arbiter.
Arbiters are used in digital systems to arbitrate requests for shared
resources. For example, if n units share a bus that only one can use at a time,
an n-input arbiter is used to determine which unit gets access to the bus
during a given cycle (see Section 24.2).4 Another use of an arbiter is in
arithmetic circuits where to normalize numbers we need to find the position
of the most significant 1 (see Section 11.3.3). In this application, they are
called find-first-one units, because there is no arbitration going on and they
are reversed (compared with what we discuss here) to find the most
significant 1.
An arbiter can be constructed as an iterative circuit. That is, we can design
the logic for one bit of the arbiter and repeat (or iterate) it. Figure 8.31 shows
the logic for one bit (bit i) of the arbiter. One AND gate generates the grant
output for this bit, gi. The grant is set high if the request, ri, is high and no 1
has been found so far, as signaled by a 1 on the top input. The second AND
gate signals downstream bits if no 1 has been found by this stage or any
previous stage. We will see many examples of iterative circuits in our study
of digital design. They are widely used in arithmetic circuits (see Chapter
10).

--- Page 270 ---
Figure 8.31. Logic diagram for one bit of an arbiter. The output is true only if no 1s have been found
so far, and the input is 1. If a 1 has previously been found, or if the input to this stage is 1, an output
signal informs other stages that a 1 has been found.
To build a four-bit arbiter, for example, we connect four copies of the bit
cell of Figure 8.31 and connect the top input of the first cell to “1.” The
resulting circuit is shown in Figure 8.32(a). The vertical chain of AND gates
scans over the request inputs until the first 1 is found and disables all outputs
below this input. The output AND gates pass the first input 1 to the output
and force zeros on all outputs below this first 1.

--- Page 271 ---
Figure 8.32. Two implementations of a four-bit arbiter: (a) using the bit-cell of Figure 8.31; (b) using
look-ahead.
The linear chain of AND gates in this circuit gives a delay that increases
linearly with the number of inputs. In some applications this delay can be
prohibitive. We can shorten the delay somewhat by flattening the logic, as
shown in Figure 8.32(b). This technique is often called look-ahead since the
gate that generates output g3 is looking ahead at inputs r0, r1, and r2 rather
than waiting for their effects to propagate through a chain of gates. We will
look at more scalable approaches to look-ahead for iterative circuits in
Section 12.1.
VHDL descriptions of two arbiters are shown in Figure 8.33. One arbiter,
Arb, finds the least significant 1 and the other, RArb, finds the most
significant 1. The implementation of Arb directly follows Figure 8.32(a).
Signal g is generated by ANDing the ‘no 1s so far’ signal c with the request
input r. The ‘no 1s so far’ signal, c, is generated by using a concatenation to
set its LSB to 1 (always enabling output g0) and to set the remaining bits to
c(i) = not r(i-1) and c(i-1). At first this definition looks circular
because it appears that we are defining c in terms of itself. On closer

--- Page 272 ---
examination we realize that each bit of c depends only on less significant
bits of c. The definition is not circular.
Figure 8.33. VHDL description of two arbitrary-width fixed-priority arbiters. Arb finds the least
significant 1 and RArb finds the most significant 1.
For comparison, Figure 8.34 shows a behavioral description of a four-bit
arbiter that finds the least significant 1 in input a. This description uses a
case? statement to compress the 16-line truth table to five lines. The default
case (“when others =>”) should never occur. However, we must include a
default case because the std_logic type includes non-synthesizable values
(e.g., ’U’ for “uninitialized” and ’X’ for “unknown value”) and VHDL
requires that all possible input combinations (including those containing
non-synthesizable values) are covered in a case or case? statement.

--- Page 273 ---
Figure 8.34. Behavioral VHDL description of a four-bit arbiter that finds the least significant 1.
One use of an arbiter is to build a priority encoder, as shown in Figure
8.35. A priority encoder takes an n-bit input signal a and outputs an m =
⌈ log2 n⌉  bit binary signal b that indicates the position of the first one bit in a.
The priority encoder operates in two steps, as shown in Figure 8.35(a). First,
an arbiter finds the first one bit in input a and outputs a one-hot signal, g,
with only this single bit set. Then, one-hot signal g is converted into a binary
signal b by an encoder. A VHDL description of the priority encoder is shown
in Figure 8.36.


--- Page 274 ---
Figure 8.35. (a) A priority encoder realized by connecting an arbiter to an encoder. (b) Schematic
symbol for a priority encoder.
Figure 8.36. VHDL description of a priority encoder.
When input a is 0, the arbiter will output g = 0, which is not a one-hot
signal. In this case, the encoder, if it is constructed from OR gates as
described in Section 8.4, will also output b = 0, which is often acceptable.
In some applications, however, this all-zero state must be detected and a
special code output to distinguish the case when the input is 0 from the case
where the first bit set is bit zero. This is easily accomplished by making the
arbiter one bit wider than otherwise needed and applying a constant 1 signal
to the last input bit.
A behavioral VHDL description of a priority encoder is shown in Figure
8.37. This circuit outputs don’t cares "---", not 0, in the case where the
input is r = 8b"0". It can easily be modified by adding one line to the case?
statement to assign any value desired to b (or to an auxiliary output) for the
case where r = 8b"0".

--- Page 275 ---
Figure 8.37. Behavioral VHDL description of a priority encoder.
EXAMPLE 8.3 Programmable-priority arbiter
Using slice notation, write a VHDL expression for a programmable-priority arbiter. Your arbiter
should accept a one-hot priority signal p that determines the bit of r having the highest priority.
Priority should decrease leftward from this bit position, wrapping around from bit n−1tobit0. For
example, for an eight-bit arbiter, if bit 6 of p is set, r(6) has the highest priority, r(7) has the second
highest priority, r(0) has the third highest priority, and so on. To facilitate timing verification, your
design should not include cyclic logic.
We can achieve the desired function with cyclic logic by writing the following two statements:
c <= p or (not (r(n-2 downto 0) & r(n-1)) and c(n-2 downto 0) & c(n-1)); g <= r and
c;
Note that in VHDL not has higher precedence than concatenation (&), which in turn has higher
precedence than and. The first statement computes a per-bit carry signal c by starting with a “1” bit in
the position specified by p and then propagating this carry to the left, cyclically, as long as the
corresponding bit of r is low. This finds the highest priority request. Unfortunately this logic is cyclic
and hence not compatible with modern timing verification tools.

--- Page 276 ---
To make the logic acyclic, we duplicate the carry chain, making it 2n long, so we can propagate a
carry out of bit (n-1) without creating a cycle.
c <= ((n-1 downto 0 => ’0’) & p) or
(not (r(n-2 downto 0) & r & r(n-1)) and c(2 ∗ n-2 downto 0) & ’0’);
g <= r and (c(2 ∗ n-1 downto n) or c(n-1 downto 0));
8.6 COMPARATORS
Figure 8.38 shows the schematic symbol for an equality comparator. This
component accepts two n-bit binary inputs a and b and outputs a one-bit
signal that indicates whether a = b; i.e., whether each bit of a is equal to the
corresponding bit of b.
Figure 8.38. Schematic symbol for an equality comparator. The eq output is true if a = b.
Figure 8.39 shows a logic diagram for a four-bit equality comparator. An
array of exclusive-NOR (XNOR) gates compares individual bits of the input
signals. The output of each XNOR gate is high if its two inputs are equal, so
signal eqi is true if ai = bi. An AND gate combines the eqi signals and
outputs true only if all bits are equal. Alternatively, we can design the
equality comparator as an iterative circuit by linearly scanning the bits to
determine that all are equal.

--- Page 277 ---
Figure 8.39. Logic diagram of a four-bit equality comparator. Exclusive-NOR (XNOR) gates are used
to compare individual bits of inputs a and b. An AND gate combines the bit-by-bit comparisons and
signals true if all bits are equal.
A VHDL description of an equality comparator is shown in Figure 8.40.
Here we use a VHDL conditional signal assignment statement combined
with the equality operator defined for std_logic_vector. An alternative
implementation of equality would use the XNOR operator to perform a
bitwise comparison as follows:
Figure 8.40. VHDL description of an equality comparator using a conditional signal assignment
statement.
eq <= and_reduce(a xnor b);
Here we use the and_reduce(x) function defined in ieee.std_logic_misc
to combine the bits of the XNOR without the need to declare an intermediate
signal.

--- Page 278 ---
A magnitude comparator is a component that compares the relative
magnitude of two binary numbers. Strictly speaking, this is an arithmetic
circuit, since it treats its inputs as numbers, and thus we should defer its
treatment until Chapter 10. We present it here because it is an excellent
example of an iterative circuit.
Figure 8.41 shows a schematic symbol for a magnitude comparator. The
single bit output gt is true if n-bit input a is greater than n-bit input b. One
binary signal is greater than another if it has a 1 in the most significant
position in which the two numbers are not equal.
Figure 8.41. Schematic symbol for an magnitude comparator. The gt output is true if a > b.
We can structure two different iterative circuits for the magnitude
comparator, as shown in Figure 8.42. In Figure 8.42(a) we scan from LSB to
MSB to find the most significant bit in which the two numbers disagree. In
this design we propagate a signal gtb (greater than below). Signal gtbi, if set,
indicates that from the LSB through bit i − 1 signal a is greater than b, i.e.,
gtbi implies ai−1:0 > bi−1:0. Bitgtbi+1 is set if ai > bi or if ai = bi and ai−1:0 >
bi−1:0.


--- Page 279 ---
Figure 8.42. Two iterative implementations of the magnitude comparator. (a) LSB first; a greater than
below, gtb, signal is propagated upward. (b) MSB first, two signals: greater than above, gta, and equal
above, eqa, are propagated downward.
The gtbn signal out of the most significant bit gives the required answer
since it indicates that an−1:0 > bn−1:0. A VHDL description of this LSB-first
magnitude comparator is shown in Figure 8.43.
Figure 8.43. VHDL description of an LSB-first magnitude comparator.
An alternative iterative implementation of a magnitude comparator that
operates MSB first is shown in Figure 8.42(b). Here we have to propagate
two signals between each bit position. Signal gtai (greater than above)
indicates that a > b for bits more significant than the current bit, i.e., an−1:i+1
> bn−1:i+1. Similarly, eqai (equal above) indicates that an−1:i+1 = bn−1:i+1.
These two signals scan the bits from MSB to LSB. As soon as a difference is
found, we know the answer. If the first difference is a bit where a >
b,wesetgtai−1 and clear eqai−1 out of this bit position, and these values
propagate all the way to the output. On the other hand, if b > a in the first bit
that differs, we clear eqai−1 but leave gtai−1 low. These signals also
propagate all the way to the output. The output is the signal gta−1.

--- Page 280 ---
A behavioral VHDL description of a magnitude comparator is given in
Figure 8.44. This design entity is much simpler to understand than that of
Figure 8.43. Most synthesis tools will generate very good logic from this
code, using look-ahead techniques when needed to meet the specified timing
constraints. The equality comparator of Figure 8.40 is already in behavioral
form.
Figure 8.44. Behavioral VHDL description of a magnitude comparator.
EXAMPLE 8.4 Three-way equality comparator
Write a VHDL expression for a three-way equality comparator that outputs true if three inputs, a, b,
and c, are equal to one another.
The VHDL code is shown below. It suffices to compare two pairs of inputs. Note that equality (=)
has higher operator precedence than and. The VHDL code is
eq <= ’1’ when a = b and a = c else ’0’;
8.7 SHIFTERS
A shifter is a combinational block that takes a bit field a and a shift count n
and outputs a shifted by n positions. Left-shifters shift left, right-shifters
shift right, barrel-shifters rotate input a (wrapping the bits that fall off the
left (or right) so they appear entering on the right (or left)) and funnel-
shifters select a small bit field from a specified position of a larger bit field.

--- Page 281 ---
Figure 8.45 shows the VHDL code for a left-shifter. With the default
parameters, the design entity accepts an eight-bit input a and a three-bit shift
count n and produces a 15-bit output b equal to a shifted left by n bit
positions. With the maximum shift count n = 7, the input bit field is left-
aligned in output b. The bit field is right-aligned in b with the minimum shift
count.
Figure 8.45. VHDL description of a left-shifter.
Figure 8.46 shows the VHDL code for a barrel-shifter. This design entity
performs a left shift of a on signal x and then ORs the high bits of x with the
low bits of x to generate the wrapped output b.

--- Page 282 ---
Figure 8.46. VHDL description of a barrel-shifter.
We leave the description of a funnel-shifter to Exercise 8.17.
8.8 READ-ONLY MEMORIES
A read-only memory, or ROM, is a component that implements a look-up
table. It accepts an address as input, and outputs the value stored in the table
at that address. The ROM is read-only because the values stored in the table
are predetermined – hard-wired at the time the ROM is manufactured – and
cannot be changed. In Section 8.9 we will examine read–write memories,
where the table entries can be changed. A discussion of memories from a
systems perspective is given in Chapter 25.
The schematic symbol for a ROM is shown in Figure 8.47. For an N-word
× b-bit ROM, an n = ⌈ log2 N⌉  bit address signal a selects a word of the table.
The b-bit value stored in that word is output on data output d.

--- Page 283 ---
Figure 8.47. Schematic symbol for a ROM. The n-bit address a selects a location in a table. The value
stored in that location is output on the b-bit data output d.
A ROM can implement an arbitrary logic function by storing the truth
table of that function in the ROM. For example, we can implement a seven-
segment decoder with a ten-word × seven-bit ROM. The value 1111110, the
segment pattern for 0, is placed in the first location (location 0), the value
0110000, the segment pattern for 1, is placed in the second location
(location1),and so on.
A simple implementation of a ROM using a decoder and tri-state buffers
is shown in Figure 8.48. An n → N decoder decodes the n-bit binary address
a into an N-bit one-hot word select signal, w. Each bit of this word select
signal is connected to a tri-state gate. When an address a = i is applied to the
ROM, word select signal wi goes high and enables the corresponding tri-
state buffer to drive table entry di onto the output.

--- Page 284 ---
Figure 8.48. A ROM can be implemented with a decoder and a set of tri-state gates with constants
connected to their inputs. The address is decoded to select one of the tri-state gates. That gate drives its
corresponding value onto the output.
For large ROMs, the one-dimensional ROM structure of Figure 8.48
becomes unwieldy and inefficient. The decoder becomes very large –
requiring N AND gates. Above a certain size, it is more efficient to construct
a ROM as a two-dimensional array of cells, as shown i Figure 8.49. Here the
eight-bit address a7:0 is divided into a six-bit row address a7:2 and a two-bit
column address a1:0. The row address is input to a decoder and used to select
a row via a 64-bit one-hot select signal w. The column address is input to a
binary-select multiplexer that selects the appropriate word from the row. For
example, if the address is a = 5 = 000101, then the row address is 0001 = 1,
and the column address is 01. Thus select line w1 goes high to select the row
containing d4 through d7, and the multiplexer selects the second word of this
line, d5.

--- Page 285 ---
Figure 8.49. A ROM can be implemented more efficiently as a two-dimensional structure. A decoder
selects a row of words. A multiplexer selects the desired column from the selected row.
While the address bits are not split evenly, the ROM of Figure 8.49 is
realized using a square array of bits. There are 64 rows, and each row
contains 64 bits; four words of 16 bits each. Square arrays tend to give the
most efficient memory layouts because they minimize the peripheral
(decoder and multiplexer) overhead. Very large ROMs (more than 105−106
bits) are built from multiple arrays using either bit-slicing or banking, as
described in Section 25.2.
In practice, ROMs employ highly optimized circuits. For clarity, we
illustrate a ROM here with conventional logic symbols – a tri-state buffer at
each location. In fact, most ROMs use circuits that require only a single
transistor (or its absence) to store each bit.
A ROM can be modeled in VHDL using a case statement, as shown in
Figure 8.50. Such a block can either be implemented by being synthesized
into logic gates that implement the ROM functionality, or be replaced with a
hard-wired ROM component. The logic synthesized for this block will have
a different area, delay, and power depending on the ROM contents. This can
make modifying ROM data late in the design process difficult. Also, as the

--- Page 286 ---
ROM becomes larger, the size of the case statement and the potential for
designer errors increases.
Figure 8.50. VHDL description of a ROM built using a case statement. Because it is not
parameterized or easily modified, we recommend using the ROM of Figure 8.51.
Alternatively, a ROM can be modeled using an array of
std_logic_vector values that are initialized from a file, as shown in Figure
8.51. Unfortunately, VHDL as defined in IEEE Standard 1076 does not

--- Page 287 ---
provide a standardized approach for initializing a ROM from a file. As a
consequence, different tool vendors have implemented support for this
important feature using different approaches. Figure 8.51 includes support
for two common approaches, which are described below. Before discussing
how the ROM is initialized, we first discuss the syntax used to declare the
ROM.

--- Page 288 ---
Figure 8.51. VHDL for an arbitrarily sized ROM. At the beginning of simulation or synthesis, the
ROM is initialized with the data loaded from the file with parameterized name filename.

--- Page 289 ---
The ROM itself is declared as a VHDL array using the following three
lines:
The first line declares word_t to be a subtype of std_logic_vector with a
prespecified width of data_width bits. The next line, beginning with the
keyword type, declares a new type mem_t as an array containing 2addr_width
elements, each with the subtype word_t. The last line above declares
rom_data as a signal with type mem_t.
To access a value in the ROM at address addr we use the following line:
data <= rom_data(to_integer(unsigned(addr)));
As a consequence of its strong typing, VHDL requires that we explicitly
convert addr to a value of integer type before using it to index an array.
One approach to initialize the ROM, which is supported by, e.g., Mentor
Graphics ModelSim x® and Xilinx Vivado®, uses a VHDL function. In
Figure 8.51 this function is declared starting at the line:
impure function init_rom (filename: in string) return mem_t ...
and it is invoked at the line:
signal rom_data: mem_t := init_rom(filename);
This invocation of the function is performed once to provide the contents of
memory either at the start of simulation or during synthesis.
The second approach to initializing the ROM, which works with, e.g.,
Altera Quartus II ®, employs a VHDL attribute declaration and specification
to enable the designer to indicate the name of a file containing the ROM
contents (in .mif format):
attribute ram_init_file : string;
attribute ram_init_file of rom_data : signal is
filename;
During synthesis Quartus II ® recognizes the ram_init_file attribute on
rom_data as a special (Altera specific) synthesis attribute.
However the ROM is modeled, with a case or an array, ROMs above a
critical size (a few thousand bytes) should generally be implemented as a
custom ROM component rather than as a synthesized logic block. First, with

--- Page 290 ---
optimized circuit design and layout, a ROM is typically much smaller, and
often much faster, than an equivalent logic circuit. Second, the regular
structure allows us to change the contents of the ROM without changing its
overall layout – as long as its size doesn’t change. Only small changes to the
internals of the ROM are required. Some ROMs are programmable by
changing only a single metal layer, making changing ROM contents
relatively inexpensive.
The contents of most ROMs are determined at the time the ROM is
manufactured – by the presence or absence of a transistor. Programmable
ROMs, or PROMs, are manufactured without a pattern and are programmed
electrically later – by blowing a fuse or placing charge on a floating gate.
Using PROMs makes low-volume applications more economical by
removing the tooling costs otherwise required to configure a ROM. Some
PROMs are onetime programmable – once programmed, they cannot be
changed. Erasable programmable ROMs, or EPROMs, can be erased and
reprogrammed multiple times. Some EPROMs are erased by exposure to UV
light (UV-EPROMs), while others are electrically erasable (EEPROMs).
8.9 READ–WRITE MEMORIES
A read–write memory, or RWM, is like a ROM, but also allows the contents
of the table to be changed or written. For historical reasons, read–write
memories are commonly called RAMs.5 The use of the term RAM to refer to
a RWM is almost universal, so we will adopt it as well. Strictly speaking, a
RAM is a sequential logic device – it has state, and hence its outputs depend
on its input history – and so we should defer discussing RAMs until Chapter
14. However, because they are common building blocks, we will go ahead
and discuss the basics of RAMs here.
A schematic symbol for a single-port RAM is shown in Figure 8.52(a). If
the write signal wr is low, the RAM performs just like the ROM. Applying
an address to input a results in the contents of the corresponding location
being output on data output do. When signal wr goes high, a write takes
place. The value on data input di is written to the location specified by a. We
can use this RAM to store a value in a location – by addressing the location

--- Page 291 ---
and setting wr high. At a later time we can read out the stored value – by
addressing the location again with wr low.
Figure 8.52. Schematic symbols for RAMs. The data input di is written to the selected location if the
write line wr is true. (a) A single-port RAM shares address lines for both read and write. (b) A dual-
port RAM has separate address lines: ao for read and ai for write.
In the single-port RAM of Figure 8.52(a), only one location, specified by
the single address a, can be addressed at a time. If we are writing at the
location specified by a we cannot read a different location at the same time.
A dual-port RAM overcomes this limitation. The schematic symbol for a
dual-port RAM is shown in Figure 8.52(b). With the dual-port RAM, the
read port (signals ao and do) is independent from the write port (signals ai,
di, and wr). A location specified by ao can be read onto data output do at the
same time as data input di is being written to a different location specified by
ai. Dual-port RAMs are often used to interface two subsystems, with one
subsystem writing the RAM and the other subsystem reading it. RAMs can
be constructed with an arbitrary number of read and write ports, but the cost
of the RAM increases quadratically with the number of ports.
A simple implementation of a dual-port RAM using two decoders, latches,
and tri-state buffers is shown in Figure 8.53. The read decoder and tri-state
buffers form a structure identical to the ROM of Figure 8.48. The read
address ao is decoded to N read word select lines wo0, ..., woN−1. Each read
word select line enables the corresponding location onto the read output do.

--- Page 292 ---
Figure 8.53. A dual-port RAM can be implemented with two decoders, latches to store the data, and
an array of tri-state buffers for reading. Actual RAMs use a two-dimensional structure and more
efficient circuit design for the storage element.
The difference between the read port and the ROM is that the data stored
at each location are obtained from a latch in the RAM (rather than being a
constant in the ROM). A latch is a simple storage element that copies its
input D to its output Q when its enable G input is high. When G is low, the
output Q holds its previous value – giving us a simple one-bit memory.
Latches are described in more detail in Section 27.1.
The write port of the RAM uses the write decoder to decode the write
address ai to write word select lines wi0, ..., wiN−1 when wr is asserted. When
wr is not asserted, all write word select lines remain low. When location i is
written, write word select line wii goes high, storing the input data on di into
the ith latch. When the address changes or wr goes low, wii goes low and the
latch retains the stored data.
As with the ROM, actual RAM implementations are much more efficient
than the simple one we illustrate here. Most RAMs employ a two-
dimensional structure, like the one shown for a ROM in Figure 8.49. The
column “multiplexing” for writes is a bit more involved and will not be

--- Page 293 ---
discussed further here. Most practical RAMs also use a much more efficient
bit cell than the latch plus tri-state buffer shown here. Most static RAMs
(SRAMs) use a six-transistor storage cell, and modern dynamic RAMs
(DRAMSs) use a cell composed of a single transistor and a storage
capacitor. The circuit details of these RAM cells are beyond the scope of this
book.
We show the VHDL code to model a dual-port RAM in Figure 8.54. The
read function is identical to that of the ROM of Figure 8.51. The write
function is implemented within the process and updates the selected
location any time signal write is high. When write is low, the last value
written to an address is saved. As mentioned above, because it saves state, a
RAM is not a combinational circuit, but rather a sequential circuit (see
Chapter 14). Unlike our ROM in Figure 8.51, the RAM is not initialized to
any values. Each address must be written before it is read to avoid getting
undefined data values.6 Many RAM components have a synchronous
interface where a clock edge is required to perform a read or write operation.
We discuss RAM blocks further in Chapter 25.

--- Page 294 ---
Figure 8.54. The VHDL for a RAM block. Whenever the write signal is high, din is written into
location wa. We continuously assign the output to be the value stored at location ra.
8.10 PROGRAMMABLE LOGIC ARRAYS
A programmable logic array, or PLA, is a regular structure that can be
configured to realize an arbitrary set of sum-of-products logic functions. As
shown in Figure 8.55, a PLA consists of an AND plane and an OR plane.
The AND plane is a two-dimensional structure with literals (inputs and their
complements) running vertically and product terms running horizontally. In
each row, an arbitrary set of literals is selected as inputs to an AND gate to
realize an arbitrary product term. The literals connected to each AND gate

--- Page 295 ---
are denoted by squares in the figure. For example, the top AND gate takes as
input three literals, a0, a1, and a2, and generates their product a0 ∧  a1 ∧  a2.
Figure 8.55. A programmable logic array (PLA) consists of an AND plane and an OR plane. By
programming the connections, an arbitrary set of product terms can be realized by the AND plane.
These product terms are then combined into sum-of-products realizations of logic functions by the OR
plane. This figure shows a full adder implemented as a PLA with seven product terms in the AND
plane and two sums (for sum and carry) in the OR plane.
The AND plane is much like the decoder in a ROM, except that the
product term for each row is arbitrary, whereas the product term for each
row of a decoder is the minterm corresponding to the address of that row.
Several rows of a PLA may go high at the same time, while only one row of
a ROM’s decoder will be activated at a time.
The OR plane is another two-dimensional structure: the product terms run
horizontally and the outputs (sums) run vertically. In each column, arbitrary
product terms are ORed together to form an output. In Figure 8.55, the
products combined by each OR are denoted by squares. For example, the
rightmost column ORs together the bottom three products.

--- Page 296 ---
In practice, PLAs usually use the same structure both for the AND plane
and for the OR plane – either a NAND or a NOR gate. By De Morgan’s law,
A NAND–NAND PLA is equivalent to the AND–OR PLA shown in Figure
8.55. A NOR–NOR PLA realizes the complement of a function and can be
followed by an inverter to realize a function directly. A highly optimized
circuit structure in which each crosspoint in a plane requires only a single
transistor (or its absence) is often used.
Most PLAs are hard-wired at manufacture. The literals in each product
and the products in each sum are selected by the presence or absence of a
transistor. Some PLAs are configurable with a bit of storage controlling
whether a literal is included in a product or a product in a sum. Such
configurable PLAs are many times larger than an equivalent hard-wired
PLA.
8.11 DATA SHEETS
We will often use a building block, or an entire subsystem, in a larger design
without understanding its implementation. When we use a building block in
this manner, we rely on the specification of the block. This specification,
often called a data sheet, gives enough information for us to use the block,
but omits internal details of how the block is constructed.
A data sheet typically contains the following.
(1) A functional description of the block – what the block does. This should
be in sufficient detail as to specify completely the block’s behavior. For
a combinational block, a truth table or equation is often used to specify
the block’s function.
(2) A detailed description of the inputs and outputs of the block: a signal-by-
signal description that gives the signal name, width, direction, and a
brief description.
(3) A description of all block parameters, if any.
(4) A description of all the visible state and registers in the block (for
sequential blocks).
(5) The synchronous timing of the block: the cycle-level timing of the
block.

--- Page 297 ---
(6) The detailed timing: the timing of input and output signals within a
single cycle.
(7) Electrical properties of the block: power requirements, power consumed,
input and output signal levels, input loads, and output drive levels.
We defer discussion of numbers (5) and (6) until after we have discussed
sequential circuits and timing.
An example data sheet for a hypothetical 4 → 16 decoder is shown in
Figure 8.56. This data sheet describes the behavior of a module without
describing its implementation. The function of the module is specified by a
formula (b = 1<<a). We could just as easily have used a 16-row truth table.
The timing section specifies the propagation and contamination delay (see
Chapter 15) of the module in picoseconds (ps). Finally, the electrical section
gives the input load in femtofarads (fF) and the output resistance (drive) in
kiloohms (kΩ).
Figure 8.56. Example data sheet for a 4 → 16 decoder.
A building block that is a physical chip has the actual values of its
electrical and timing parameters in the data sheet. For a VHDL block that

--- Page 298 ---
has yet to be synthesized, these parameters are not yet known. The
capacitive load of each input, for example, is not known until after the block
has been synthesized and the physical design of the block is complete.
A constraint file is used to specify targets for timing and electrical
parameters. These targets (or constraints) are then used to direct the
synthesis and physical design tools. A very simple constraint file for our 4 →
16 decoder is shown in Figure 8.57. This file is in a form suitable for use by
the Synopsys Design Compiler ®. The file specifies that the delay of the
decoder from a to b must not exceed 0.2 ns. Rather than specify the input
load, the file specifies that input a is driven by a cell equivalent in drive to a
INV4 cell. If the synthesizer makes the input capacitance too large, the delay
of this cell driving a, which is included in the total delay, will make it hard to
meet the timing constraint. Finally, the file specifies that the output load, on
each bit of b, is 5 (capacitive units). The synthesizer must size the output
driver for the decoder large enough to drive this load without excessive
delay.
Figure 8.57. Example constraint file for 4 → 16 decoder.
8.12 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
A design team builds a chip by combining design entities they design
themselves with design entities that they obtain from other sources. The
design entities that are obtained elsewhere are often called IP, for intellectual
property.7
IP blocks are available from vendors and as open-source gateware. Some
vendors specialize in particular types of IP. For example, ARM and MIPS
specialize in selling microprocessors as IP. The microprocessors in most cell
phones are licensed as IP from ARM.
The open-source movement that has revolutionized software has its
parallel in the hardware world. Many useful pieces of VHDL IP are available
for free under an open-source license at http://www.opencores.org.
Modules available include processors, interfaces (e.g., Ethernet, PCI, USB,

--- Page 299 ---
etc.), encryption/decryption blocks, compression/decompression blocks, and
others. While these building blocks are more complex than the ones
described in this chapter, the concepts involved in using them are the same.
The design team builds a system by combining a number of blocks. The
blocks themselves are described by data sheets (and constraint files) that
specify their function, interfaces, and parameters.
As with all things, caveat emptor (buyer beware) applies to IP. Purchased
IP does not always meet its specification. The cautious designer thoroughly
tests every piece of acquired IP.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned about some common design patterns, or
idioms, of digital design – common circuits that we use repeatedly in our
designs.
Decoders convert a binary encoding of a signal to a one-hot
representation of the same signal. We use them, for example, to
select one of many rows in a memory.
Encoders do the reverse, converting a one-hot signal to a binary
representation.
Arbiters find the first high bit (searching from right or left) in an
input word. They are used, for example, to control access to
shared resources and to normalize floating-point numbers.
Combining an arbiter with an encoder gives a priority encoder.
The arbiter finds the first one bit in the input and the encoder
converts this one-hot signal to binary – outputting the binary
encoding of the position of the first 1.
Multiplexers select one of many inputs to be driven onto their
output under control of a one-hot select signal. They are widely
used for data steering in all types of datapaths. Combining a
multiplexer with a decoder gives a binary-select multiplexer.
The decoder converts a binary select signal to one-hot, and the
multiplexer uses the resulting signal to select an input.
Comparators compare two binary numbers and indicate whether
they are equal or whether one is greater than the other.

--- Page 300 ---
Comparators are often implemented as iterative circuits.
Shifters shift or rotate an input signal to produce an output signal.
They are used, for example, to align floating-point numbers for
addition.
Memories are tables that may be read-only (ROMs) or read-write
(RAMs). Given an address, the memory returns the value stored
at that address. For a RAM, the value at that address can also be
written. Memories are discussed in detail in Chapter 25.
Large versions of building block circuits such as decoders, encoders, and
multiplexers can be constructed hierarchically, as trees of smaller versions of
these circuits. These hierarchical circuits have a smaller gate count, are
faster, and consume less energy than a flat implementation when the size of
the block is large.
Building blocks (and other design entities) are often used in a design
without understanding their internal implementation. The external
characteristics of such IP blocks are specified by a data sheet.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
The TTL Data Book [106], first published in the 1970s, describes the
building block functions available as separate chips in the classic 7400-series
TTL logic family. The chips include simple gates, multiplexers, decoders,
seven-segment decoders, arithmetic functions, registers, counters (see
Chapter 16), and many others. The TTL Data Book also gives many good
examples of data sheets. The function, interfaces, electrical parameters, and
timing parameters are listed for each part.
FPGA vendors often provide a library of building block design entities to
designers. Altera’s library of parameterized components [1] is one such
example. It includes decoders, multiplexers, and many of the arithmetic
circuits discussed in Chapter 10.
The design of RAMs, ROMs, and PLAs is explored in digital integrated
circuits textbooks, such as refs. [94] and [112].
Exercises
8.1 Decoder. Write a structural VHDL description of a 3 → 8 decoder.

--- Page 301 ---
8.2 Decoder logic. Implement a seven-segment decoder using a 4 → 16
decoder and OR gates.
8.3 Two-hot decoder. Consider the alphabet of two-hot signals, that is
binary signals with only two bits equal to 1. There are (n(n − 1))/2 n-
bit two-hot symbols. Assume these symbols are ordered by their binary
value; i.e., for n = 5 the order is 00011, 00101, 00110, ..., 11000.
Design a 4 → 5 binary to two-hot decoder.
8.4 Large decoder, I. Write a VHDL design entity that implements a 5 →
32 decoder using a 2 → 4 and a 3→ 8 decoder as building blocks.
8.5 Large decoder, II. Write a VHDL design entity that implements a 6 →
64 decoder using 3 → 8 decoders as building blocks.
8.6 Large decoder, III. Write a VHDL design entity that implements a 6 →
64 decoder using 2 → 4 decoders as building blocks.
8.7 Distributed multiplexer. Implement a large (32-input) multiplexer in
which each multiplexer input and its associated select signal is in a
different part of a large chip. The 32 inputs and selects are located
along a 0.4 mm long line. Show how this can be implemented using
static CMOS gates (e.g., NANDs, NORs, and inverters – no tri-states)
with only a single wire running along the line between adjacent input
locations.
8.8 Multiplexer logic. Implement a four-bit Fibonacci circuit (output true
if the input is a Fibonacci number) using an 8 → 1 binary-select
multiplexer.
8.9 Decoder testbench. Write a testbench for a 4 → 16 decoder using an
encoder as a checker.
8.10Two-hot encoder. Design a 5 → 4 two-hot encoder using the
conventions of Exercise 8.3.
8.11 Programmable priority encoder. Write a VHDL design entity for a
priority encoder with programmable priority – an input (one-hot)
selects which bit is highest priority. The priority rotates rightward from
that bit position.
8.12Binary-priority arbiter. Write a VHDL design entity for an arbiter with
programmable priority – a binary input selects which bit is highest
priority. The priority rotates rightward from that bit position.
8.13Round-robin arbiter. Design an arbiter when the highest-priority input
in each cycle is one input to the right (cyclically) of the input that last

--- Page 302 ---
won an arbitration. Assume that the previous winner is an input to your
module.
8.14Comparator. Write a VHDL design entity for an arbitrary-width
magnitude comparator that propagates information downward from
MSB to LSB, as shown in Figure 8.42.
8.15Three-way magnitude comparator, I. Write a VHDL design entity for a
three-way magnitude comparator that outputs true if its three inputs are
in strict order: a > b > c.
8.16Three-way magnitude comparator, II. Write a VHDL design entity for a
three-way magnitude comparator that outputs true if its three inputs are
not out of order: a ≥ b ≥ c.
8.17Funnel-shifter. Write a VHDL design entity for an i to j funnel-shifter, a
block that accepts an i-bit input a and an l = log2(i − j) bit shift count n
and generates a j < i bit output b = a(n+j-1 downto n).
8.18Using building blocks, I. Using building blocks such as binary adders,
comparators, multiplexers, decoders, encoders, and arbiters, as well as
logic gates, design an 8 × 2 popularity circuit – a circuit that accepts
eight two-bit binary numbers and outputs the number of times each of
the four two-bit numbers appears on the input. Modify your circuit to
output also the two-bit number that appears the most often (high
number wins ties).
8.19Using building blocks, II. Design a combinational circuit with three
eight-bit inputs that outputs the minimum value of the three.
8.20Using building blocks, III. Design a combinational circuit with three
eight-bit inputs that outputs the median value of the three (the one that
is neither the maximum nor the minimum).
8.21ROM logic – prime number function. Implement the four-bit prime
number function using a ROM. How large a ROM is needed (what are
N and b)? What is stored in each location?
8.22ROM logic – seven-segment decoder. Implement a seven-segment
decoder with a ROM. How large a ROM is needed (what are N and b)?
What is stored in each location?
8.23PLA – prime number function. Implement the four-bit prime number
function using a PLA. How many product terms and sum terms are
needed? What are the connections for each term?
8.24PLA – seven-segment decoder. Implement a seven-segment decoder
with a PLA. How many product terms and sum terms are needed?

--- Page 303 ---
What are the connections for each term?
1 As you would expect, VHDL also has a right shift operator, srl.
2 Depending on how the don’t cares in Figure 8.12 and Figure 8.13 are interpreted during synthesis,
these two descriptions can have different behavior than that given by Figure 8.11 in the case where
s is not one-hot – i.e., when s is all zeros or has more than one bit set.
3 This is why we assign the output "00" instead of "-" to the input "0000" in Figure 8.26.
4 In this application we would typically use an arbiter with rotating priority so that the resource is
shared fairly. With a fixed-priority arbiter, the unit connected to the least significant input gets an
unfair advantage.
5 The acronym RAM stands for random-access memory. Both ROMs and RAMs as we have defined
them allow random access – i.e., any location can be accessed in any order. In contrast, a tape is a
sequential access memory – words stored on the tape must be accessed in sequential order.
6 Some SRAMs provide either a reset signal or logic to write 0 into every register location.
7 The term intellectual property (IP) is much broader than its use here. IP encompasses anything of
value which is independent of a physical object. That is, the value has been created by intellectual
effort, rather than by manufacturing. For example, all software, books, movies, music, designs –
including VHDL designs – are IP.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 304 ---
9
Combinational examples
In this chapter we work through several examples of combinational
circuits to reinforce the concepts in the preceding chapters. A multiple-of-
3 circuit is another example of an iterative circuit. The tomorrow circuit
from Section 1.4 is an example of a counter circuit with subcircuits for
modularity. A priority arbiter is an example of a building-block circuit –
built using design entities described in preceding chapters. Finally, a
circuit designed to play tic-tac-toe gives a complex example combining
many concepts.
9.1 MULTIPLE-OF-3 CIRCUIT
In this section we develop a circuit that determines whether an input number
is a multiple of 3. We implement this function using an iterative circuit (like
the magnitude comparator of Section 8.6). A block diagram of an iterative
multiple-of-3 circuit is shown in Figure 9.1. Each stage performs, in binary,
a step of long division of the input number by 3, passing along the remainder
but discarding the quotient. The circuit checks the input number one bit at a
time starting at the MSB. At each bit, we compute the remainder so far (0, 1,
or 2). At the LSB we check whether the overall remainder is 0. Each bit cell
takes the remainder so far to its left, and one bit of the input, and computes
the remainder so far to its right.

--- Page 305 ---
Figure 9.1. Block diagram of a multiple-of-3 circuit. The circuit computes the remainder, mod 3, of
the input one bit at a time working from the left (MSB) to the right (LSB). Each bit cell computes the
remainder of a three-bit number formed by concatenating the two-bit remainder in (remin) with the
current bit of the input (in). If the remainder out of the low bit is zero, the number is a multiple of 3.
The VHDL design entity for the bit cell of our iterative multiple-of-3
circuit is shown in Figure 9.2. The remainder in remin represents the
remainder from the neighboring bit to the left, and hence has a weight of 2
relative to the current bit position. In our neighboring bit this signal
represented a remainder of 0, 1, or 2. However, in the present bit, this value
is shifted to the left by one bit and it represents a value of 0, 2, or 4. Hence
we can concatenate remin with the current bit of the input, input, to form a
three-bit binary number and then take the remainder (mod 3) of this number.
A case statement is used to compute the new remainder.

--- Page 306 ---
Figure 9.2. VHDL description of bit cell for multiple-of-3 circuit.
The top-level multiple-of-3 design entity is shown in Figure 9.3. This
design entity instantiates eight copies of the bit cell of Figure 9.2. The cells
are connected together by passing two bits of remainder from one cell to the

--- Page 307 ---
next via the 16-bit signal re. Finally, the output is generated by comparing
the remainder out to zero.
Figure 9.3. VHDL code for eight-bit multiple-of-3 circuit. This design entity instantiates eight copies
of the design entity from Figure 9.2 and checks the final output for zero.
While this design entity accepts an eight-bit input, it is straightforward to
build a multiple-of-3 circuit of any length by instantiating and linking up the

--- Page 308 ---
appropriate number of bit cells.
A testbench for the multiple-of-3 circuit is shown in Figure 9.4. The
testbench checks the result of the circuit under test by checking the
remainder (mod 3) using the VHDL modulo operator mod and comparing it
with zero. The result of this comparison has the VHDL type boolean. We
convert output from std_logic to boolean using the VHDL-2008 condition
operator ?? since both operands of the inequality operator must have the
same type. Note that we do not want to use the mod operator in our circuit
itself because use of this operator will cause the synthesis program to
instantiate a prohibitively expensive divider. However, use of the mod
operator in a testbench, which is not synthesized, causes no problems.
Figure 9.4. VHDL description of the testbench for the multiple-of-3 circuit.

--- Page 309 ---
The testbench declares the device under test’s input, and output signals,
instantiates the multiple-of-3 design entity, and then walks through all
possible input states. In each input state the output of the device under test is
compared with an output computed using the mod operator. If there is a
mismatch, an error is flagged. If all states are tested with no mismatch, the
test is passed.
9.2 TOMORROW CIRCUIT
In Section 1.4 we introduced a calendar circuit. The key design entity of this
circuit was a tomorrow circuit that, given today’s date in month, day-of-
month, day-of-week format, computes tomorrow’s date in the same format.
In this section we present the VHDL implementation of this tomorrow
circuit.
A key step in designing a digital circuit is dividing a large problem into
simpler subproblems. We can then design simple design entities to solve
these subproblems and compose these design entities to solve our larger
problem. For the tomorrow circuit we can define two subproblems:
(1) increment the day of the week (this is completely independent of the
month or day of the month);
(2) determine the number of days in the current month.
Figure 9.5 shows a VHDL design entity that increments the day of the
week. If the current day is SATURDAY (which is defined to be 7 in a package
called calendar that we would define, which is not shown), this design
entity sets tomorrow’s day to be SUNDAY (which is defined to be 1). If the
current day is other than SATURDAY, the design entity just increments today to
get tomorrow.

--- Page 310 ---
Figure 9.5. VHDL description of the NextDayOfWeek design entity which increments the day of the
week.
In Section 16.1 we will see that the NextDayOfWeek design entity is the
combinational part of a counter, a circuit that increments its state. The
variation here is that when the counter reaches SATURDAY it resets back to
SUNDAY.
This design entity is coded using definitions for SATURDAY and SUNDAY.
However, it will work only if the days are represented by consecutive three-
bit integers starting with SUNDAY and ending with SATURDAY. In Exercise 9.9
we explore writing a more general version of this design entity that will
work with arbitrary representations for the days of the week.
Figure 9.6 shows a VHDL design entity that computes the number of days
in a given month. This is just a simple case statement that uses a default case
(when others =>) to handle the common case of a month with 31 days. This
design entity would be easier to read if we defined constants for the month
names. However, we use numbers for months often enough in our daily lives
that little is lost by using the numbers here.

--- Page 311 ---
Figure 9.6. VHDL description of a design entity that computes the number of days in a month when it
is not a leap year.
The astute reader will have observed that this DaysInMonth design entity
is not quite right. We have not considered leap years – when February has 29
days. We leave it as an exercise for the reader (Exercise 9.10) to remedy this
situation.
With our two components defined, we can now develop the full Tomorrow
design entity. Figure 9.7 shows the code for our full tomorrow design entity.
After the design entity, input/output, and signal declarations, it starts by
instantiating our two components. The NextDayOfWeek design entity directly
generates the tomorrowDoW output. This is also the only code to use the
todayDoW input. The day-of-week function is completely independent of the
month and day-of-month functions.

--- Page 312 ---
Figure 9.7. VHDL description of a tomorrow circuit. The circuit accepts today’s date in month, day-
of-month, day-of-week format and outputs tomorrow’s date in the same format.
Next, the circuit instantiates the DaysInMonth component. This component
generates an internal signal daysInMonth that encodes the last day of the
current month. The tomorrow component then generates two other internal
signals: lastDay is true if today is the last day of the month, and lastMonth
is true if the current month is December. Using these two internal signals,
the component then computes tomorrowMonth and tomorrowDoM using
conditional assignment statements.

--- Page 313 ---
Verifying the tomorrow circuit efficiently is a bit of a challenge. A brute
force enumeration of all states requires simulating the circuit for seven years
of input dates – 2555 inputs. We can reduce this to 365 inputs by observing
that the day-of-week function is completely independent and can be verified
independently. We can further collapse the set of tests by simulating only the
beginning and end of each month. We also must unit test the DaysInMonth
design entity to ensure that it outputs the correct amount of days for each
month.
9.3 PRIORITY ARBITER
Our next example is a four-input priority arbiter, a circuit which accepts
four inputs and outputs the index of the input with the highest value. In the
event of a tie, the circuit outputs the lowest index that has the highest value.
As an example of the arbiter’s function, suppose the four inputs are 28, 32,
47, and 19. The arbiter will output 2 because input 2 has the highest value,
47. If the four inputs are 17, 23, 19, 23, the arbiter will output 1 because, of
the two inputs (1 and 3) with the high value of 23, input 1 has the lowest
index.
This circuit is used, for example, in networking equipment where the next
packet to send is selected according to a quality-of-service (QoS) policy that
gives each packet a score. The packet with the highest score is sent first. In
this application, the score for each packet is an input to the priority arbiter,
which selects the packet to transmit.
Our implementation of the priority arbiter is shown in Figure 9.8 and a
VHDL implementation is given in Figure 9.9. The implementation performs
a tournament to select the winning input. In the first round, inputs 0 and 1
and inputs 2 and 3 are compared. The second round compares the winners of
the first round.

--- Page 314 ---
Figure 9.8. A four-input priority arbiter. This circuit accepts four inputs and outputs the index of the
input with the largest value. It operates by performing a tournament on the inputs to find the highest
value and then selecting match results to compute the index.

--- Page 315 ---
Figure 9.9. VHDL description of a four-input priority arbiter.
Each match in the tournament is performed using a magnitude comparator
(see Section 8.6). To break ties in favor of the lower number input, the
magnitude comparator computes a signal c1gt0 that is true if in1 > in0. If

--- Page 316 ---
they are tied, this signal is false, indicating that in0 has won the match. A
similar comparison is made between in3 and in2.
To select the competitors for the second round, two 2:1 multiplexers (see
Section 8.3) are used. Each multiplexer selects the winner of a first-round
match using the comparator output as the select signal.
A third magnitude comparator performs the second-round match –
comparing the two winning outputs from the first-stage multiplexers. The
output of this second-round comparator is the MSB of the priority arbiter. If
this signal is true, the winner is in2 or in3; if it is false, the winner is in0 or
in1.
To get the LSB of the priority arbiter output, we select the output of the
winning first-round comparator. This is accomplished with a single-bit wide
2:1 multiplexer controlled by the output of the final comparator.
9.4 TIC-TAC-TOE
In this section we develop a combinational circuit that plays the game of tic-
tac-toe. Given a starting board position, it selects the square on which to play
its next move. Being a combinational circuit, it can play only one move.
However, it can easily be transformed into a sequential circuit (see Chapter
14) that plays an entire game. We implement this sequential version in
Section 19.3.
Our first task is to decide how to represent the playing board. We
represent the input board position as two nine-bit vectors: one xin encodes
the position of the Xs and the other oin encodes the position of the Os. We
map each nine-bit vector to the board as shown in Figure 9.10(a). The upper
left corner is the LSB and the bottom right corner is the MSB. For example,
the board shown in Figure 9.10(b) is represented by xin = 100000001 and
oin = 000011000. For a legal board position, xin and oin must be
orthogonal, that is xin ∧  oin =0.


--- Page 317 ---
Figure 9.10. Representation of tic-tac-toe board. (a) Mapping a bit vector to the board. (b) Board
represented by xin = 100000001, oin = 000011000.
Strictly speaking, playing as X, a legal board should also have NX + 1 ≥
NO ≥ NX, where NO is the number of bits set in oin and NX is the number of
bits set in xin. IfXgoesfirst, the input should always have equal numbers of
bits set in the two inputs. If O goes first, the input will always have one more
bit set in oin than in xin.
Our output will also be a nine-bit, one-hot vector xout that indicates
which position our circuit will be playing. A legal move must be orthogonal
to both input vectors. On the next turn, xin will be replaced by the OR of the
old xin and xout, and the opponent will have added a bit to oin.
Now that we have represented the board, our next step is to structure our
circuit. A useful structure is as a set of ordered strategy components that each
apply a strategy to generate the next move, a divide-and-conquer approach.
The highest-priority that is able to generate a move is selected. For example,
a good set of strategy components is as follows.
(1) Win: if a move will complete three-in-a-row, do it.
(2) Don’t lose: if a move will block an opponent with two in a row, do it.
(3) Pick first open square: traversing the board in a particular order, pick the
first square that is open.
A selection circuit combines the inputs from our components and selects
the highest-priority component with an output. With this modular design, we
can easily add more strategy components later to refine the ability of our
circuit.
The top-level design entity for our tic-tac-toe move generator is shown in
Figure 9.11, and the VHDL for this design entity is given in Figure 9.12. It
instantiates four components: two instances of TwoInArray and one instance
each of Empty and Select3. The first TwoInArray component finds spaces (if
any) where a play would cause us to win – that is, spaces where there is a
row, column, or diagonal with two Xs and no Os. The second TwoInArray
component finds spaces (if any) where, if we didn’t play, the opponent could
win on their next play – spaces where a row, column, or diagonal has two Os
and no Xs. We use the same component both for the win and for the block
strategies because they require the same function – just with the Xs and Os
reversed. The next component, Empty, finds the first empty space according
to a particular ordering of the spaces. The ordering picks empty spaces in

--- Page 318 ---
order of their strategic value. Finally, the component Select3 takes the three
outputs of the previous components and selects the highest-priority move.
Figure 9.11. High-level design of the tic-tac-toe design entity. Three strategy components accept the
inputs, xin and oin, and compute possible moves to win, not lose, or pick an empty square. The
Select3 component then picks the one with the highest priority of these possible moves to be the next
move.

--- Page 320 ---
Figure 9.12. Top-level VHDL description for our tic-tac-toe move generator.
Most of the work in our tic-tac-toe implementation is done by the
TwoInArray design entity shown in Figure 9.13. This design entity creates
eight instances of the TwoInRow design entity (Figure 9.14). Each TwoInRow
design entity checks one line (row, column, or diagonal). If the line being
checked has two bits of a true and no bits of b true, a 1 is generated in the
position of the open space. The design entity consists of three four-input
AND gates, one for each of the three positions being checked. Note that we
check only one bit of b in each AND gate since we are assuming that the
inputs are legal, so that if a bit of a is true, the corresponding bit of b is false.

--- Page 322 ---
Figure 9.13. VHDL description of the TwoInArray design entity.
Figure 9.14. VHDL description of the TwoInRow design entity. This design entity outputs a 1 in the
empty position of a row that contains two bits of a and no bits of b.
Three instances of TwoInRow check the rows producing their result into the
nine-bit vector rows. If a bit of rows is true, playing an a into the
corresponding space will complete a row. Similarly, three instances of
TwoInRow check the three columns for two bits of a and no bits of b,
producing results into nine-bit vector cols. The final two instances of
TwoInRow check the two diagonals producing results into three-bit vectors
ddiag and udiag for the downward-sloping and upward-sloping diagonals.
After checking the rows, columns, and diagonals, the final assign
statement combines the results into a single nine-bit vector by ORing
together the individual components. The rows and cols vectors are
combined directly. The three-bit diagonal vectors are first expanded to nine
bits to place their active bits in the appropriate positions.
The Empty design entity, shown in Figure 9.15, uses an arbiter (see
Section 8.5) to find the first non-zero bit in its input vector. Note that the

--- Page 323 ---
top-level has ORed the two input vectors together and taken the complement
so each one bit in the input to this design entity corresponds to an empty
space. The input vector is permuted, using a concatenation statement, to give
the priority order we want (middle first, then corners, then edges). The
output is permuted in the same order to maintain correspondence.
Figure 9.15. VHDL description of an Empty design entity. This design entity uses an arbiter to find the
first empty space by searching first the middle space, then the four corners, then the four edges.
The Select3 design entity, shown in Figure 9.16, is also just an arbiter. In
this case, a 27-bit arbiter scans all three inputs to find the first bit. This both
selects the highest-priority non-zero input and also selects the first set bit of
this input. The 27-bit output of the arbiter is reduced to nine bits by ORing
the bits corresponding to each input together.

--- Page 324 ---
Figure 9.16. VHDL description of the Select3 design entity. A 27-input arbiter is used to find the first
set bit of the highest-priority strategy component. A three-way OR combines the arbiter outputs.
It is worth pointing out that the entire tic-tac-toe design entity is, at the
bottom level, built entirely from just two component types: TwoInRow and
RArb. This demonstrates the utility of combinational building blocks.
A simple testbench for the tic-tac-toe design entity is shown in Figure
9.17. The testbench instantiates two copies of the TicTacToe design entity.
One plays X and the other plays O. The testbench starts by checking the
copy that plays X, called dut in the testbench, with some directed testing.
The five vectors check empty, win, and block strategies and check row,
column, and diagonal patterns.

--- Page 326 ---
Figure 9.17. VHDL testbench for the tic-tac-toe design performs directed testing and then plays one
instance against another.
After the five directed patterns, the testbench plays a game of tic-tac-toe
by ORing the outputs of each instance into its input to compute the input for
the next round. The results of the game (obtained by writing a script to
massage the output of the report statements) are shown in Figure 9.18.
Figure 9.18. Results of playing one TicTacToe instance against another.
The game starts with an empty board. The empty rule applies and X plays
to the center – our highest-priority empty space. The empty rule applies for
the next two turns as well, and O and X take the top two corners. At this
point X has two in a row, so the block rule applies and O plays to the bottom
left corner (position 6), completing the first row of the figure.
The second row of the figure starts with the block rule, causing X to play
on the left edge (position 3); O then blocks X in the middle row. At this point
empty causes X to take the remaining corner. In the last two moves, empty
causes O and X to fill the two remaining open spaces. The game ends in a
draw.
The verification performed by this testbench is by no means adequate to
verify proper operation. Many combinations of inputs have not been tried.
To verify the design thoroughly a checker is required. This would typically
be implemented in a high-level programming language (like “C”) and
interfaced to the simulator. Proper operation would then be verified by
comparing the simulation results with the high-level language model. One
hopes that the same mistake would not be made in both models.
Once a checker is in place, we still need to pick the test vectors. After
more directed testing (e.g., win, block, near-win, and near-block on all eight
lines), we could take two approaches. We could exhaustively test the design
(there are 218 input cases). Depending on how fast our simulator runs, we
may have time to try them all. Alternatively, if we don’t have time for

--- Page 327 ---
exhaustive testing, we could apply random testing, randomly generating
input patterns and checking the resulting outputs.
Summary
In this chapter you have seen four extended examples that bring together
much of what we have learned up to this point in the book. The multiple-of-3
circuit is an example of an iterative circuit. It is built from eight
Multiple_of_3_bit components, each of which is an example of a
combinational design entity specified with a case statement. The top-level
design entity is a good example of structural VHDL. The testbench for this
circuit performs exhaustive testing and is self-checking.
Our tomorrow circuit implements a function specified in Section 1.4 that
computes the day and date of tomorrow given the day and date of today as
input. The components of this circuit give examples of defining
combinational circuits using both case and concurrent assignment
statements. The top-level design entity mixes structural VHDL –
instantiating and connecting the components – with the use of concurrent
assignment statements at the same level.
The priority arbiter gives an example of realizing a function by
composing combinational building blocks – in this case comparators and
multiplexers. The circuit performs a tournament among the inputs using a
comparator to select a winner of each match and using a multiplexer to route
the winner to the next level of the tournament.
Finally, our tic-tac-toe circuit illustrates how complex functionality can be
built from simple circuits and how the divide-and-conquer technique can be
used to break a complex task down into simple parts. The top-level circuit
instantiates a strategy component and then uses an arbiter to select the
highest-priority result. Each strategy component, in turn, is implemented
from simple logic components. At the bottom level, the entire circuit is
implemented by arbiters and TwoInRow components.
Exercises
9.1 Voting circuit. Using combinational building blocks such as adders,
comparators, multiplexers, decoders, encoders, and arbiters, as well as
logic gates, design a circuit that accepts five three-bit one-hot numbers

--- Page 328 ---
and outputs the three-bit one-hot number that occurred most often on
the inputs. Ties can be broken in any manner. For example, if the
inputs are 100, 100, 100, 010, and 001, the output will be 100.
9.2 Middle circuit. Using building blocks such as binary adders,
comparators, multiplexers, decoders, encoders, and arbiters, as well as
logic gates, design a circuit that accepts three one-hot eight-bit
numbers, a27:0, a17:0, and a07:0, and outputs the input with the middle
of the three values. For example, if the inputs are a2 = 10000000, a1 =
00010000, and a0 = 00000001, the output should be 00010000, the
middle of the three one-hot values.
9.3 Multiple-of-5 circuit, design. Using an approach similar to the
multiple-of-3 circuit of Section 9.1, design a multiple-of-5 circuit that
outputs true iff its eight-bit input is a multiple of 5.
9.4 Multiple-of-5 circuit, implementation. Code your design from Exercise
9.3 in VHDL and exhaustively verify it with a testbench.
9.5 Multiple-of-10 circuit, design. Design a circuit that outputs true if its
eight-bit input is a multiple of 10. (Hint: think about how few bits of
remainder you need to implement this function.)
9.6 Multiple-of-10 circuit, implementation. Code your design from
Exercise 9.5 in VHDL and exhaustively verify it with a testbench.
9.7 Modulo-3 circuit, design. Modify the multiple-of-3 circuit of Section
9.1 to output in %3, that is the input modulo 3.
9.8 Modulo-3 circuit, implementation. Code your design from Exercise 9.7
in VHDL and exhaustively verify it with a testbench.
9.9 Modifying the calendar circuit, I. Recode the NextDayOfWeek design
entity so it will work with arbitrary definitions of the constants
‘SUNDAY, ‘MONDAY, ..., ‘SATURDAY.
9.10Modifying the calendar circuit, II. Modify the calendar circuit to work
correctly in leap years. Assume your input includes the year – in 12-bit
binary format.
9.11 Calendar representations. Design a combinational logic circuit that
takes a date as the number of days since January 1, 0000, and returns
the date in month, day-of-month format. (Optional: also generate day-
of-week format.)
9.12Ties in the priority arbiter, design. The priority arbiter of Section 9.3
currently breaks ties in favor of the lower-numbered input. Modify the
circuit so that it breaks ties in favor of the higher-numbered input.

--- Page 329 ---
9.13Ties in the priority arbiter, implementation. Code your design from
Exercise 9.12 in VHDL and verify it with selected test cases.
9.14Five-input priority arbiter. Modify the priority arbiter of Section 9.3 to
take five inputs.
9.15Eight-input priority arbiter. Modify the priority arbiter of Section 9.3
to take eight inputs.
9.16Inverted priority. Modify the priority arbiter of Section 9.3 to pick the
input with the lowest value.
9.17Winning value. Modify the priority arbiter of Section 9.3 to output the
value of the winning input.
9.18Tic-tac-toe strategy, I. Extend the tic-tac-toe design entity Section 9.4
by adding a strategy design entity to play to a space that creates two in
a row. Create a design entity called OneInARow that finds rows,
columns, and diagonals with one X and no Os. Use this component to
build a design entity OneInArray that implements this strategy.
9.19Tic-tac-toe strategy, II. Extend the tic-tac-toe design entity of Section
9.4 by adding a strategy component that, on an empty board, plays to
space 0 (upper left corner).
9.20Tic-tac-toe strategy, III. Extend the tic-tac-toe design entity of Section
9.4 by adding a strategy component that, on a board that is empty
except for an opponent O in two opposite corners and your X in the
middle, plays to an adjacent edge space. (Play to the space marked H in
the diagram below.1)
9.21Tic-tac-toe, input check. Add a component to the tic-tac-toe design
entity that checks whether the inputs are legal.
9.22Tic-tac-toe, game over. Add a component to the tic-tac-toe design entity
that outputs a signal when the game is over and indicates the outcome.
The signal should encode the options: playing, win, lose, draw.
9.23Verification. Build a checker for the tic-tac-toe design entity and write
a testbench that performs random testing on the design.
1 If you play to a corner in this situation, your opponent O will win in two moves.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 330 ---
Part III
Arithmetic circuits
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 331 ---
10
Arithmetic circuits
Many digital systems operate on numbers, performing arithmetic operations such asaddition and multiplication. For example, a digital audio system represents a waveformas a sequence of numbers and performs arithmetic to filter and scale the waveform.Digital systems internally represent numbers in binary form. Arithmetic functions,including addition and multiplication, are performed as combinational logic functions onthese binary numbers. In this chapter, we introduce binary representations for positiveand negative integers and develop the logic for simple addition, subtraction,multiplication, and division operations. In Chapter 11, we expand on these basics bylooking at floating-point number representations that approximate real numbers. InChapter 12, we look at methods for accelerating arithmetic operations. Finally, Chapter13 presents several examples of designs that use these arithmetic operations.
10.1 BINARY NUMBERS
As human beings we are used to representing numbers in decimal, or base-10, notation.That is, we use a positional notation in which each digit is weighted by ten times the weightof the digit to its right. For example, the number 123410 (the subscript implies base 10)
represents 1 × 1000 + 2 × 100 + 3 × 10 + 4. It is likely that we use the decimal systembecause we have ten fingers on which to count.With digital electronics, we do not have ten fingers; instead, we have two states, 1 and 0,with which to represent values. Thus, while computers can (and sometimes do) representnumbers in base 10, it is more natural to represent numbers in base 2, or binary, notation.With binary notation, each digit is weighted by two times the weight of the digit to its right.For example, the number 10112 (the subscript implies base 2) represents 1 × 8 + 0 × 4 + 1 ×
2+ 1 = 1110.
More formally, a number an−1, an−2, ..., a1, a0 in base b represents the value
(10.1)

--- Page 332 ---
For a binary number, b = 2, and we have
(10.2)
Bit an−1 is the leftmost or most significant bit (MSB) of the binary representation, while bit
a0 is the rightmost or least significant bit (LSB).
We can convert from one base to another by evaluating either Equation (10.1) orEquation (10.2) in the target base, as we did above to convert 10112 to 1110. Converting
from decimal to binary can be done by applying this technique. For example, 123410 =
1×11111010002 +102 ×11001002 +112 ×10102 +1002 ×1 = 11111010002 +110010002 +
111102 + 1002 = 100110100102. However, this procedure is a bit tedious, requiring lots of
binary calculations.It is usually more convenient to subtract repeatedly the highest power of 2 less than thenumber, and then add these powers of 2 to form the representation in base 2. For example,in Equation (10.3) we convert the number 123410 to binary. We start with 123410 in the left
column and repeatedly subtract the largest power of 2 that is smaller than the remainingnumber. Each time we subtract a value from the left column, we add the same number – butwith binary representation – to the right column. At the bottom, the left column is 0; wehave subtracted away the entire value of 123410, and the right column is 100110100102, the
binary representation of 123410. We have added the entire value of 123410 in this column,
one bit at a time:
(10.3)
Because binary numbers can be quite long – representing a four-digit decimal numbertakes 11 digits – we sometimes display them using hexadecimal, or base-16, notation.Because 16 = 24, it is easy to convert between binary and hexadecimal. We simply break abinary number into four-bit chunks and convert each chunk to base 16. For example 123410
is 100110100102 and 4D216. As shown below, we simply take each four-bit group of

--- Page 333 ---
100110100102, starting from the right, and convert the group to hexadecimal. We use the
characters A−F to represent single digits with values 10–15, respectively. So 1010 = A16,
1110 = B16, 1210 = C16, 1310 = D16, 1410 = E16, and 1510 = F16. So, the character D in 4D216
implies that the second digit (with weight 16) has a value of 13:
(10.4)
Some digital systems use a binary-coded decimal, or BCD, representation to encodedecimal numbers. This is a representation where each decimal digit is represented by a four-bit binary number. In BCD, the value is given by
(10.5)
(10.6)
That is, each decimal group di of four bits is weighted by a power of 10, and each binary
digit bij within decimal group di is additionally weighted by a power of 2. For example, the
number 123410 = 0001001000110100BCD:
(10.7)
The reason why we use binary notation to represent numbers in digital systems is that itmakes common operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, etc.) easy to perform. Asalways, we pick a representation suitable for the task at hand. If we had a different set ofoperations to perform, we might pick a different representation.
EXAMPLE 10.1 Binary conversion
Convert the number 5961 to the following notations: binary, hexadecimal, and BCD. We can follow the same process as inEquation (10.3) to convert to binary. There will be a total of 13 bits in the answer:

--- Page 334 ---
The number 596110 is 10111010010012 in binary. To write the value in hexadecimal, we group the binary digits into sets
of four:
0001 0111 0100 1001
1 7 4 9
Finally, in BCD, the number becomes 0101 1001 0110 0001.
10.2 BINARY ADDITION
The first operation we will consider is addition. We add binary numbers the same way weadd decimal numbers – one digit at a time, starting from the right. The only difference isthat the digits are binary, not decimal. This actually simplifies addition considerably sincewe only have to remember four possible combinations of digits (rather than 100).To add two bits, a and b, together, there are only four possibilities for the result, r, asshown in Table 10.1. In the first row, we add 0 + 0 to get r = 0. In the second and third rowswe add 0 + 1 (or equivalently 1 + 0) to get r = 1. Finally, in the last row, if both a and b are1, weget r = 1 + 1 = 2.
Table 10.1. Truth table for a half adder
a b y c s
0 0 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 1
1 0 1 0 1
1 1 2 1 0

--- Page 335 ---
To represent results r ranging from 0 to 2 requires two bits, s and c, as shown in Table10.1. The LSB, s, we refer to as the sum, and the MSB, c, we refer to as the carry. (Thereason for these names will become clear shortly when we discuss multi-bit addition.)A circuit that adds two bits together to produce a sum and carry is called a half adder.The reader will have noticed that the truth table for the sum is the same as the truth table foran XOR gate and the truth table for the carry is just the truth table for an AND gate. Thuswe can realize a half adder with just these two gates, as shown in Figure 10.1.
Figure 10.1. Half adder: (a) symbol, (b) logic circuit.
To handle a carry input, we require a circuit that accepts three input bits: a, b, and cin (forcarry in), and generates a result r that is the sum of these bits. Now r can range from 0 to 3,but it can still be represented by two bits, s and cout (for carry out). A circuit that adds threeequally weighted bits together to generate a sum and a carry is called a full adder, and atruth table for this circuit is shown in Table 10.2.
Table 10.2. Truth table for a full adder
a b cin y cout s
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 1 0 1
0 1 0 1 0 1
0 1 1 2 1 0
1 0 0 1 0 1
1 0 1 2 0 1
1 1 0 2 1 0
1 1 1 3 1 1
A full adder circuit is shown in Figure 10.2. From Table 10.2, we observe that the sumoutput has the truth table of a three-input exclusive-or (i.e., the output is true when an oddnumber of the inputs are true). The carry output is true whenever a majority of the inputsare true (two or three inputs true out of three), and thus can be implemented using amajority circuit (Equation (3.6)).


--- Page 336 ---
Figure 10.2. Full adder: (a) symbol, (b) logic circuit.
The astute reader will have observed by now that adder circuits are really counters. A halfadder, or a full adder, just counts the number of 1s on its inputs (all inputs are equivalent)and reports the count in binary form on its output. For a half adder the count is in the rangeof 0 to 2, and for a full adder the count ranges from 0 to 3.We can use this counting property to construct a full adder from half adders as shown inFigure 10.3(a). In the figure the numbers in parentheses indicate the weight of a signal. Theinputs are all weighted (1). The result output is a binary number with the sum weighted (1)and the carry out weighted (2). Because an adder counts the 1s on its inputs, they should allbe of equal weight – otherwise one input would count more than another. We use one halfadder to count two of the original inputs, producing a sum which we call p (for propagate)and a carry which we call g (for generate). If the propagate signal is true, a one bit on carryin (cin) will cause carry out to go high. That is, the carry in propagates to the carry out. Ifthe generate signal is true, the carry out will be true regardless of the carry in. We say thatbits a and b generate the carry out. We will see in Section 12.1 how the generate andpropagate signals are used to build very fast adders. For now, however, we will continuewith our simple adder.
Figure 10.3. A full adder can be constructed using (a) three half adders or (b) two half adders and an OR gate. Thenumbers in parentheses show the weight of each signal.
A second half adder combines p (of weight (1)) with the carry input (also of weight (1))to produce the sum output s (of weight (1)) and a carry output, which we call cp (forpropagated carry) (of weight (2)). At this point we have a single weight (1) signal, s, andtwo weight (2) signals, cp and g. We use a third half adder to combine the two weight (2)signals. The sum output of this third half adder is the carry out (of weight (2)). The carryoutput (which would be of weight (4)) of this half adder is unused. This is because, withonly three inputs, there is no way for a count of 4 to occur.We can simplify the circuit of Figure 10.3(a) by taking advantage of the facts that (a) weneed only the sum output of the last half adder, and (b) the two inputs of the last half adderwill never both be high. Fact (a) lets us replace the half adder with an exclusive-or gate. TheAND gate in the half adder is not needed because the carry output is unused. Fact (b) lets usreplace the XOR gate with an OR gate (a much simpler gate to implement in CMOS)

--- Page 337 ---
because their truth tables are identical, except for the state where both inputs are high. Theresult is the circuit of Figure 10.3(b). The VHDL description for this circuit is shown inFigure 10.4.
Figure 10.4. VHDL description of a full adder constructed from half adders.
Figure 10.5 shows an optimized CMOS logic circuit for a full adder. The circuit consistsof an inverter and five CMOS gate circuits, Q1–Q5, including two two-input NAND gates,Q1 and Q3, and three three-input OR-AND-invert (OAI) gates, Q2, Q4, and Q5. Gates Q1and Q2 form the first half adder – providing complemented outputs p and g. Gates Q3 andQ4 form an exclusive-NOR (XNOR) gate which acts as the XOR of the second half adder –producing output s. The input OR (low-true AND) part of gate Q5 performs the AND partof the second half adder. Signal cp is not produced, however. It remains internal to gate Q5.The output AND (low-true OR) part of gate Q5 performs the OR to combine g with cp andgenerates the carry out.


--- Page 338 ---
Figure 10.5. CMOS gate-level implementation of a full adder.
It is illustrative to see how these arithmetic circuits are realized in CMOS gates.Fortunately, with modern logic synthesis, you will very rarely have to work with arithmeticcircuits at the gate level.Now that we have circuits that can add single bits, we can move on to multi-bit addition.To add multi-bit numbers, we simply apply this single-bit binary addition one bit at a timefrom right to left. For example, suppose we are working with four-bit binary numbers. Toadd 310 0011 to 610 0110 we compute as shown below:
We start in the rightmost column by adding the two LSBs 0 + 1 to give 1 as the LSB of theresult. The result can be represented in a single bit (i.e., it is less than 2), so the carry intothe next column (denoted by the small gray number on the top row) is 0. With the carry, wehave three bits to sum for the second column, 0, 1, and 1, and the result is 2 – so the secondbit of the sum is 0 and we carry a 1 to the top of the third column. In the third column thebits are 1, 1, and 0 – again two 1s, so the sum and carry are again 0 and 1, respectively. Inthe fourth and final column, only the carry is a 1, so the sum is 1 and the carry (not shown)is 0. The result is 0110 + 0011 = 1001 or 610 + 310 = 910.
EXAMPLE 10.2 Binary addition
Perform, in binary, the following addition: 7110 + 5110.
First, we convert the numbers to binary: 7110 = 10001112 and 5110 = 110011. Next, we add (the carry outputs on the top
row, sum outputs on the bottom):
When we convert the answer back to decimal, we can check that 11110102 = 12210.
We can build a multi-bit adder circuit from full adders by operating in the same manner –starting from the LSB and working toward the MSB. Such a circuit is shown in Figure 10.6.The bottom full adder, FA0, sums a carry in, cin, with the LSBs of the two inputs a0 and b0
generating the LSB of the sum s0 and a carry into bit 1, c1. We could have used a half adder
for this bit; however, we chose to use a full adder to allow us to accept a carry in. Eachsubsequent full adder bit, FAi, sums the carry into that bit, ci, with that bit’s inputs ai and bi
to generate that bit of the sum, si, and the carry into the next bit, ci+1.

--- Page 339 ---
Figure 10.6. Multi-bit binary adder.
This circuit is often referred to as a ripple-carry adder because, if the inputs are setcorrectly (exactly one of ai or bi true for all i), the carry will ripple from cin to cout,
propagating through all n full adders. For large n (more than 8) this can be quite slow. Wewill see in Section 12.1 how to build adders with delay proportional to log(n) rather than n.For most applications, the appropriate way to describe an adder in VHDL is behaviorally,as shown in Figure 10.7. After declaring the inputs and outputs, the actual description hereis a single line that uses the “+” operator to add single-bit cin to n-bit a and b. Theconcatenation of cout and s accepts the output.
Figure 10.7. Behavioral VHDL description of a multi-bit adder. This description uses the definition of “+” from
std_logic_unsigned to describe addition.

--- Page 340 ---
Modern synthesis tools are quite good at taking a behavioral description, like the oneshown here, and generating a very efficient logic netlist. In fact, many tools come withlibraries of optimized versions of various arithmetic units. There is rarely any reason todescribe an adder in more detail.For illustrative purposes, an alternative VHDL description of an adder is shown in Figure10.8. This design entity describes the bit-by-bit logic of a ripple-carry adder in terms ofAND, OR, and XOR operations. The description defines n-bit propagate and generatevariables and then uses them to compute the carry. The definition of the carry uses aconcatenation and subfield specification to make bit i of the carry a function of bit i − 1.This is not a circular definition.
Figure 10.8. Bit-wise logical VHDL description of a ripple-carry adder.
While this description is useful for showing the logical definition of an adder, it maygenerate a logic netlist that is inferior to the behavioral description of Figure 10.7. This isbecause the synthesis tool may not recognize it as an adder – and hence not perform itsspecial adder synthesis. In contrast, when you use the “+” operator, there is no doubt thatthe circuit being described is an adder. The logical description is also harder to read andmaintain. Without the design entity name, signal names, and comments, you would have tostudy this design entity for a while to discern its function. In contrast, using “+,” it isimmediately obvious to a reader (as well as a synthesis tool) what you mean.Our n-bit adder (of Figures 10.6–10.8) accepts two n-bit inputs and produces an (n + 1)-bit output. This ensures that we have enough bits to represent the largest possible sum. Forexample with a three-bit adder, adding binary 111 to 111 gives a four-bit result, 1110. Inmany applications, however, we need an n-bit output. For example, we may want to use theoutput as a later input. In these cases we need to discard the carry out and retain just the n-bit sum. Restricting ourselves to an n-bit output raises the specter of overflow – a conditionthat occurs when we compute an output that is too large to be represented as n bits.Overflow is usually an error condition. It is easily detected; any time carry out is 1, anoverflow has occurred. Most adders perform modulo arithmetic on an overflow condition –they compute a + b (mod 2n). For example, with a three-bit adder, adding 111 + 010 gives001 (710 + 210 = 110 (mod 810)). In Exercise 10.20 we will look at a saturating adder which
takes a different approach to producing an output during an overflow condition.

--- Page 341 ---
10.3 NEGATIVE NUMBERS AND SUBTRACTION
With n-bit binary numbers, using Equation (10.2) we can represent only non-negativeintegers up to a maximum value of 2n −1. We often refer to binary numbers that representonly positive integers as unsigned numbers (because they don’t have a + or − sign). In thissection we will see how to use binary numbers to represent both positive and negativeintegers, often referred to as signed numbers. To represent signed numbers, we have threemain choices: 2’s complement, 1’s complement, and sign-magnitude.The simplest system conceptually is sign-magnitude. Here we simply add a sign bit, s, tothe number, with the convention that if s = 0 the number is positive and if s = 1 the numberis negative. By convention we place the sign bit in the leftmost (MSB) position. Considerthe numbers +2310 and −2310. In sign-magnitude representation, +2310 = 0101112 and −2310
= 1101112SM. All that changes between the two numbers is the sign bit. Our value function
becomes
(10.8)
To negate a 1’s complement number, we complement all of the bits of the number. So, tonegate our example number, +2310 = 0101112, we get −2310 = 1010002OC. The value
function becomes
(10.9)
Here the sign bit, an−1, is weighted, but by −(2n−1 − 1) (a number that is all 1s in binary
representation – hence the name 1’s complement).Finally, to negate a 2’s complement number, we complement all of the bits of the numberand then add 1. For our example number, +2310 = 0101112 and −2310 = 1010012. The value
function becomes
(10.10)
Compared with 1’s complement, the weight on the sign bit has been decreased by 1 to−2n−1.So which of these three formats should we use in a given system? The answer depends onthe system. However, the vast majority of digital systems use a 2’s complement numbersystem because it simplifies addition and subtraction. We can add positive or negative 2’s

--- Page 342 ---
complement numbers directly, using binary addition, and get the correct answer. The sameis not true of sign-magnitude or 1’s complement numbers.Consider, for example, adding +4 and −3 to get a result of +1 represented as four-bitsigned binary numbers. The inputs and outputs of this computation are shown for the threenumber systems below. For 2’s complement, adding +4 (0100) to −3 (1101) gives +1(10001) – the correct answer if we ignore the carry (there is more on carry and overflowbelow). In contrast, just adding the 1’s complement numbers gives 10000,1 and adding the
sign-magnitude numbers gives 1111.2 Here are the inputs and outputs:
To see why 2’s complement numbers make adding negative numbers easy, it is instructiveto review how we generate a 2’s complement integer. We complement the bits and add 1.Complementing the bits of a number x gives 2n − 1 − x (15 – x for four-bit integers); forexample, 15 − 3 = 12, which is 1100 in binary (the 1’s complement of 3). The 2’scomplement of x is one more than this, or 2n − x (16 − x for four-bit integers); for example,16 − 3 = 13, which is 1101 in binary (the 2’s complement of 3). Because all addition isperformed mod 2n, the 2’s complement of a number, 2n − x, is the same as −x. Hence we getthe correct result. Returning to our example, we have
(10.11)
It is often helpful when thinking about 1’s complement or 2’s complement arithmetic tovisualize the numbers on a wheel, as shown in Figure 10.9. Here we show the four-bitnumbers from 0000 (at the 12 o’clock position) to 1111 incrementing in a clockwisedirection around a circle. In Figures 10.9(a), (b), and (c) we show the values assigned tothese bit patterns by the 2’s complement, 1’s complement, and sign-magnitude numbersystems, respectively.

--- Page 343 ---
Figure 10.9. Number wheels showing three encodings of negative numbers: (a) 2’s complement, (b) 1’s complement, and(c) sign-magnitude.
One thing that becomes immediately apparent from the figure is that 1’s complement andsign-magnitude do not have a unique representation for 0. In 1’s complement, for example,both 0000 and 1111 represent the value 0. This makes comparison difficult. An equalitycomparator (see Section 8.6) cannot by itself determine whether two 1’s complement orsign-magnitude numbers are equal because one may be +0 and the other −0, which areequivalent.More importantly, the circle lets us see the effect of modular arithmetic. Adding −x to anumber has the effect of moving 16 − x steps clockwise around the circle, which is exactlythe same as moving x steps counterclockwise around the circle. For example, −3 isequivalent to moving 13 steps clockwise or three steps counterclockwise, so adding −3 toany value between −5 and +7 gives the correct result. (Adding −3 to a value between −6and −8 results in an overflow because we cannot represent results less than −8.)How do we detect overflow when adding 2’s complement numbers? We saw above thatwe may generate a carry as a result of modular arithmetic and get the correct answer.However, we can still generate results that are out of range. For example, what happenswhen we add −3 to −6 or +4 to +4? We get +7 and −8, respectively – both incorrect. Howdo we detect this to signal an overflow?

--- Page 344 ---
The key thing to observe here is that the signs changed. We can always add a positivenumber to a negative number (or vice versa) and get a result that is in range. An overflowwill occur only if we add two numbers of the same sign and get a result of the oppositesign. Thus we can detect overflows by comparing the signs of the inputs and outputs.3
Now that we can add negative numbers, we can build a circuit to subtract. A subtractoraccepts two 2’s complement numbers, a and b, as input and outputs q = a − b. A circuit toboth add and subtract is shown in Figure 10.10. In add mode, the sub input is low, so theXORs pass the b input unchanged and the adder generates a + b. When the sub input ishigh, the XORs complement the b input and the carry into the adder is high, so the addergenerates a + b + 1 = a − b.
Figure 10.10. A 2’s complement add/subtract unit.
Figure 10.11 shows how we can augment our add/subtract circuit to detect overflow withthree gates. The first XOR gate detects whether the two input signs are different (sid); thesecond XOR determines whether an input sign is different than the output sign (siod). TheAND gate checks whether the two input signs are the same (sid = 0) and different than theoutput sign (siod = 1). If so, then overflow has occurred.
Figure 10.11. A 2’s complement add/subtract unit with overflow detection based on comparison of sign bits.
We can simplify the overflow detection to a single XOR gate as shown in Figure 10.12.This simplification is based on an observation about the carries into and out of the sign bit.Table 10.3 enumerates the six cases – inputs positive, different, or negative, and carry in 0or 1. When the input signs are different (p = 1, g = 0), the carry into the sign bit willpropagate. Thus the carry in and out are the same in this case. When the inputs are bothpositive (p = 0, g = 0) a carry into the sign bit indicates an overflow and will not propagate.Finally, if the inputs are both negative (g = 1), an overflow will occur unless there is a carryinto the sign bit. Thus, we see that overflow occurs iff the carry into the sign bit (cis) andthe carry out of the sign bit (cos) are different.

--- Page 345 ---
Figure 10.12. A 2’s complement add/subtract unit with overflow detection based on carry in and out of the last bit.
Table 10.3. Cases for inputs and carry into sign bit of adder to detect overflow. Columns show sign bit of a and b (asand bs), carry into and out of sign bit (cis and cos), and output sign bit (qs). Overflow occurs only if the carry intoand out of the sign bit are different.
as bs cis qs cos ovf Comment
0 0 0 0 0 0 Both inputs positive, both carries 0, nooverflow
0 0 1 1 0 1 Both inputs positive, carry in 1, overflow
0 1 0 1 0 0 Input signs different, carry in 0, no overflow
0 1 1 0 1 0 Input signs different, carry in 1, no overflow
1 1 0 0 1 1 Both inputs negative, carry in 0, overflow
1 1 1 1 1 0 Both inputs negative, carry in 1, no overflow
VHDL code for the add/subtract unit is shown in Figure 10.13. This code instantiates aone-bit adder to add the sign bits and an n − 1 bit adder to add the remaining bits. The XORof the b input with the sub input is performed in the argument list for each adder.

--- Page 346 ---
Figure 10.13. Structural VHDL code for add/subtract unit with overflow detection. This implementation instantiates theadder component.
An alternative VHDL implementation is shown in Figure 10.14. This code uses assignstatements with the “+” operator in place of instantiating predefined adders. It still performsan explicit XOR on the b input before the add.
Figure 10.14. Behavioral VHDL description of add/subtract unit with overflow detection. This implementation uses the“+” operator to perform the 2’s complement addition. Entity declaration is shown in Figure 10.13.

--- Page 347 ---
One might be tempted to avoid the explicit XOR and instead code an add/subtract unit(ignoring carry out and overflow) using a statement like
process(a,b,sub) begin
if sub then
s <= a - b;
else
s <= a + b;
end if;
end process;
Don’t do this! Almost all synthesis systems will generate two separate adders for thiscode: one to do the “+” and a second to do the “−.” While this code is quite clear and easyto read, it does not synthesize well – generating twice the logic of the alternative version.Once we have a subtractor, then, with the addition of a zero-checker on the output, wealso have a comparator. If we subtract, computing s = a − b, then if s = 0 then a = b, and ifthe sign bit of s is true, then (a − b) < 0, so a < b.When adding 2’s complement signed numbers of different lengths, one must first signextend the shorter number. It is required that the sign bits – which have negative weight – bein the same position. If the numbers are added without sign extension, the negative-weightsign bit of the shorter number will be incorrectly added to a positive-weight bit of the longernumber. For example, if we add 1010, a four-bit representation of −610, to 001000, a six-bit
representation of +810, we get 010010 = 1810. This is because 1010 is misinterpreted as
1010.
A 2’s complement number can be sign extended by just copying the sign bit into the newpositions to the left. For example, sign extending 1010 to six bits gives 111010. Ouraddition now becomes 111010 + 001000 = 000010 = 210, which is the correct result.
In hardware, sign extension is accomplished with no additional gates, just wiring torepeat the sign bit. In VHDL it is easily expressed using the concatenate operator. Forexample, if a is n bits long and b is m < n bits long, we sign extend b to n bits by writing
...
generic( n: integer := 6; m: integer := 4 );
signal a: std_logic_vector(n-1 downto 0);
signal b: std_logic_vector(m-1 downto 0);
... (n-m downto 0 => b(m-1)) & b(m-2 downto 0) ... -- sign extend b to n
bits
When shifting a 2’s complement signed number it is important that the sign bit beduplicated when right-shifting and that overflow be checked when left-shifting. Overflowon a left-shift occurs when the sign of the result differs from the sign of the input. To right-shift an n-bit 2’s complement number b correctly by three places we can write
use ieee.numeric_std.all;
...

--- Page 348 ---
signal b: signed(n-1 downto 0);
...
shift_right(b,3)
To shift b by a variable amount s, 0 ≤ s ≤ m, to the right we can write
use ieee.numeric_std.all;
...
signal b: signed(n-1 downto 0);
...
shift_right(b,to_integer(unsigned(s)));
EXAMPLE 10.3 Negative numbers
Convert the number −82 to sign-magnitude, 1’s complement, and 2’s complement eight-bit binary numbers.We note that 82 in binary is 10100102. To convert to sign-magnitude format, we simply append the sign (1) to the
beginning of the number: 11010010. The 1’s complement form is found by inverting all the bits of the positive number(01010010): 10101101. Finally, we find the 2’s complement number by adding 1 to the 1’s complement: 10101110.
EXAMPLE 10.4 Subtraction
Subtract, in 2’s complement, 8210 from 7210.
We must first convert both 72 and −82 to binary: 01001000 and 10101110 (see Example 10.3), respectively. Next, weperform the addition:
Finally, we verify that 111101102 does indeed equal −1010.
10.4 MULTIPLICATION
We multiply binary numbers the same way we multiply decimal numbers: by multiplyingdigits, shifting and adding. Multiplying one bit by another is simpler than multiplyingdecimal digits. There are only four cases to consider: 0 × 0 = 0, 1 × 0 = 0, 0 × 1 = 0, 1 × 1 =1. Hence, multiplying two one-bit numbers can be performed by an AND gate. Multiplyingmulti-bit binary number n by a single bit b results in two cases: n × b = n if b = 1 and n × b= 0 if b = 0. To multiply two multi-bit binary numbers we employ shifting. Shifting a binarynumber left by one position is the same as multiplying it by 2. For example, the number1012 = 510; if we shift it left by one position, we get 10102 = 1010; another left-shift gives
101002 = 2010, and so on.
To multiply two unsigned binary numbers an−1, ..., a0 and bn−1, ..., b0, we add a copy of a
shifted to the appropriate position for each position in which b is 1. That is, we compute b0a
+ b1(a << 1) + · · · + bn−1(a << (n − 1)).
For example, consider multiplying a = 1012 by b = 1102 (510 × 610). In long notation we
write

--- Page 349 ---
Here b0 = 0, hence the row of 0s in the unshifted position. We add in 101 shifted by 1 since
b1 = 1 and 101 shifted by 2 since b2 = 2. Summing these three partial products gives 11110
= 3010.
A circuit to perform multiplication on two four-bit unsigned binary numbers is shown inFigure 10.15. An array of 16 AND gates forms four four-bit partial products. The first rowof four AND gates forms b0a. The second row forms b1a shifted one position left, and so
on. An array of 12 full adders then sums the partial products by columns to produce theeight-bit product p7, ..., p0. Partial product bit pp00, formed by b0 ∧  a0, is the only partial
product of weight (1), so it directly becomes p0. Partial product bits pp01 and pp10 are both
of weight (2) and are summed by a full adder to give p1. Product bit p2 is computed by
summing pp02, pp11, and pp20 along with the carry out of the weight (1) adder. The
remaining bits are computed in a similar manner – by summing the partial products in theircolumn along with carries from the previous column.

--- Page 350 ---
Figure 10.15. Four-bit unsigned binary multiplier.
Note that all partial products in a column have indices that sum to the weight of thatcolumn: e.g., 02, 11, and 20 all sum to (2). This is because the weight of a partial product isequal to the sum of the indices of the input bits from which it’s derived. To see this,consider that multiplication can be expressed as

--- Page 351 ---
(10.12)
VHDL code for the four-bit multiplier is shown in Figure 10.16. Four assignments form thepartial products pp0 to pp3, each a four-bit vector. Three four-bit adders are then instantiatedto add up the partial products. The second input to each of these adders is a concatenation ofthe high three bits out of the previous adder and either 0 (for the first adder) or the carry outof the previous adder.
Figure 10.16. VHDL code for a four-bit unsigned multiplier.
The multiplier of Figures 10.15 and 10.16 multiplies unsigned numbers. It will notproduce the correct result with a 2’s complement signed number on the a input because thepartial products are not sign extended to full width before being added. Also, it will notproduce correct results with a 2’s complement negative number on the b input. This isbecause the multiplication counts on b3 are being weighted by 8 rather than −8. We leave
the modification of the multiplier to handle a 2’s complement number as an exercise(Exercise 10.50). Also, the use of Booth recoding (see Section 12.2) results in a multiplierthat naturally handles signed numbers.
EXAMPLE 10.5 Binary multiplication
Multiply the unsigned hexadecimal number E16 by the number D16.

--- Page 352 ---
The final result of the multiplication is B616. We show our work below:
10.5 DIVISION
At this point we know how to represent signed and unsigned integers in binary form andhow to add, subtract, and multiply these numbers. To complete the four functions needed tobuild a simple calculator, we also need to learn how to divide binary numbers.As with decimal numbers, we divide binary numbers by shifting, comparing, andsubtracting. Given a b-bit divisor x and a c-bit dividend y we find the c-bit quotient q so thatq = ⌊  y/x⌋ . We may also compute a b-bit remainder r so that r = y − qx = y (mod x). Thequotient output must be the same length as the dividend to handle the case where x = 1correctly.We perform the division one bit at a time – generating q from the left (MSB) to the right.We start by comparing 
  We set 
 We then prepare for the next iteration by computing the remainder so far,
 and the shifted divisor, 
  At each
bit i we repeat the comparison, computing 
  and then computing 
and 
For example, consider dividing 13210 = 100001002 by 1110 = 10112. The process is
shown below:
For the first four iterations, i = 7, ..., 4 (not shown), 
  and no subtractions areperformed. Finally, on the fifth iteration, i = 3, we have 
  so we set bitq3 = 1and subtract to compute 
  We shift 
 right to get 
These two values are equal, so bit q2 = 1. Subtracting gives 
  and all subsequent bits
of q are 0.A six-bit by three-bit divider is shown in Figure 10.17. The circuit consists of six nearlyidentical stages. Stage i generates bit qi of the quotient by comparing an appropriately

--- Page 353 ---
shifted version of the input 
 with the remainder from the previous stage 
 The remainderfrom stage 
  is generated by a subtractor and a multiplexer. The subtractor subtractsthe shifted input from the previous remainder. If qi is true, the multiplexer selects the result
of the subtraction, 
 to be the new remainder. If qi is false, the previous remainder is
passed unchanged. Stage 0 generates the LSB of the quotient q0 and the final remainder, r.
Figure 10.17. Binary divider.

--- Page 354 ---
A divider is quite costly in terms of gate count, but not quite as costly as Figure 10.17indicates. For clarity, the figure shows six subtractors and six comparators. In practice, thesubtractor can be used as the comparator. The carry out of the subtractor can be used as thequotient bit. If the carry out of the subtractor is 1, then a >= b. With this optimization, thecircuit can be realized with six subtractors and six multiplexers.A further optimization can be made by reducing the width of the subtractors. The firstsubtractor can be made a single bit wide. To see this, note that x << 5 has zeros in its lowfive bits. Thus, the low five bits of the result will be equal to the low five bits of y, y4:0, and
we don’t need to subtract these bits. Also note that if x has any non-zeros anywhere otherthan its LSB, then x << 5 is guaranteed to be larger than y, and the result of the subtractionis not needed. Thus, we need not feed the upper bits of x into the subtractor. We do,however, need to check whether the upper bits of x are non-zero as part of computing theMSB of the quotient q5. If an upper bit of x is non-zero, then x << 5 > y and q5 = 0. With
these observations we see that the first subtractor needs only to subtract the LSB of x fromthe MSB of y. Hence a one-bit subtractor suffices. By a similar set of arguments, we can usea two-bit subtractor for the stage that computes q4, a three-bit subtractor for the q3 stage,
and a four-bit subtractor for the q2 stage. The q1 and q0 stages can also use a four-bit
subtractor. The remainder into the q1 stage is guaranteed to be no more than five bits in
length, and the remainder into the q0 stage is at most four bits long. Hence the upper bits of
these subtractors can be omitted.VHDL code for a six-bit by three-bit divider is shown in Figure 10.18. This code uses thesubtractors to perform the comparison and optimizes the width of the subtractors for eachstage. Each subtractor is realized using an Adder component (Figure 10.7) with the secondinput complemented and the carry in set to 1’b1. Each multiplexer is implemented with anassign statement using the ? : operation. For the first stage, the upper two bits of input x
are checked as part of the comparison, and in the second stage the MSB of x is checked.The remainder of the VHDL code follows directly from the schematic.

--- Page 355 ---
Figure 10.18. VHDL code for a six-bit by three-bit divider.
In addition to consuming a great deal of space, dividers are also very slow. This isbecause the subtract in one stage must be completed to determine the multiplexer command– and hence the intermediate remainder before the subtract in the next stage can be started.Thus, the delay through a c-bit by b-bit divider using ripple-carry adders is proportional to c

--- Page 356 ---
× b, since c subtracts, of b + 1 bits in length (after the first b stages), must be performed.This is in contrast to a multiplier where the partial products can be summed in parallel.
EXAMPLE 10.6 Division
Divide EA16 by 1216.
Our work in arriving at the final answer, D16, is shown below:
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to perform arithmetic using combinational logiccircuits. We have seen how to represent positive and negative numbers and how to performthe four functions found on a typical calculator: +, −, ×, and ÷ on integers.We represent numbers with multi-bit digital signals using a weighted representation,where the rightmost bit (the least significant bit, or LSB) is weighted 1 and every other bithas a weight that is 2× that of its right neighbor. In other words, bit i, if it is 1, represents avalue of 2i.We represent negative numbers with 2’s complement notation in which the weight of theleft most bit (the most significant bit or MSB) is negated. In a signed number, we refer tothis bit as the sign bit. A number with a sign bit of 0 is positive. A negative number has asign bit of 1. We negate a number by complementing each bit (the 1’s complement) andadding 1. When we operate on signed numbers, we must often sign extend them, copyingthe sign bit multiple times, so that all numbers being operated on have their sign bit in thesame position.With this weighted binary notation, we can perform addition of multi-bit signals one bitat a time – performing a carry operation when the sum of two bits generates an output thatcarries into the next bit position. By writing out the truth table for summing three bits ofequal weight into a two-bit binary output, we derive the full adder. Multi-bit addition isperformed by an iterative circuit of full adders. To perform subtraction we take the 2’scomplement of one input (negating that input) and then add.Overflow occurs when the result of an arithmetic operation is too large to be representedin the width of the output signal. For an unsigned addition, overflow is detected when thereis a carry out of the last bit. For signed addition, an overflow occurs when the two inputshave one sign and the output has the opposite sign – or equivalently when the carry into thesign bit is different than the carry out of the sign bit. Some systems use saturatingarithmetic to limit the error caused by an overflow.

--- Page 357 ---
Multiplication and division are performed exactly as with decimal numbers. Withmultiplication, every bit of one input is multiplied (ANDed) by every bit of the other input,forming a matrix of partial products. Each partial product has a weight given by the productof the weights of the inputs from which it was derived. That is, ppij = ai ∧  bj has weight 2i+j.
An array of adders is used to sum the partial products to give the final answer. We will seein Chapter 12 how to do this faster.A divider performs long division in binary by subtracting shifted versions of the divisorfrom the current remainder – the dividend for the first iteration.
Exercises
10.1Decimal to binary conversion, I. Convert 817 from decimal to binary notation. Usethe minimum number of bits possible. Express the result in hexadecimal.10.2Decimal to binary conversion, II. Convert 1492 from decimal to binary notation.Use the minimum number of bits possible. Express the result in hexadecimal.10.3Decimal to binary conversion, III. Convert 1963 from decimal to binary notation.Use the minimum number of bits possible. Also express the result in hexadecimal.10.4Decimal to binary conversion, IV. Convert 2012 from decimal to binary notation.Use the minimum number of bits possible. Also express the result in hexadecimal.10.5Binary to decimal conversion, I. Convert 0011 0011 0001 from binary to decimalnotation.10.6Binary to decimal conversion, II. Convert 0111 1111 from binary to decimalnotation.10.7Binary to decimal conversion, III. Convert 0100 1100 1011 0010 1111 from binaryto decimal notation.10.8Binary to decimal conversion, IV. Convert 0001 0110 1101 from binary to decimalnotation.10.9Hexadecimal to decimal conversion, I. Convert 2C from hexadecimal to decimalnotation. Also express the number in binary-coded decimal (BCD) notation.10.10Hexadecimal to decimal conversion, II. Convert BEEF number from hexadecimal todecimal notation. Also express the number in binary-coded decimal (BCD) notation.10.11 Hexadecimal to decimal conversion, III. Convert 2015 from unsigned hexadecimalto decimal notation. Also express the number in binary-coded decimal (BCD)notation.10.12Hexadecimal to decimal conversion, IV. Convert F00D from unsigned hexadecimalto decimal notation. Also express the number in binary-coded decimal (BCD)notation.10.13Hexadecimal to decimal conversion, V. Convert DEED from unsigned hexadecimalto decimal notation. Also express the number in binary-coded decimal (BCD)notation.10.14Binary addition, I. Add the following pair of binary numbers:


--- Page 358 ---
10.15Binary addition, II. Add the following pair of binary numbers:
10.16Binary addition, III. Add the following pair of hexadecimal numbers:
10.17Binary addition, IV. Add the following pair of hexadecimal numbers:
10.18Bit counting circuit, design. Using full adders, design a circuit that accepts a seven-bit input and outputs the number of inputs that are 1 as a three-bit binary number.10.19Bit counting circuit, implementation. Write VHDL code to represent your circuitfrom Exercise 10.18 and demonstrate its correct operation via simulation.10.20Saturating adder, design. In some applications, particularly signal processing, it isdesirable to have an adder saturate, producing a result of 2n−1 on an overflowcondition rather than producing a modular result. Design a saturating adder. You mayuse n-bit adders and n-bit multiplexers as basic components.10.21Saturating adder, implementation. Write VHDL code for your saturating adder ofExercise 10.20 and demonstrate its correct operation by simulating it onrepresentative test cases. Your code should take the width of the adder as aparameter.10.22Vector adder. Design and write VHDL for a circuit that can function as a 32-bitadder, two 16-bit adders, or four eight-bit adders. You may have no more than 32 fulladders in your circuit. The inputs to your design entity are a(31 downto 0), b(31
downto 0), add2x16, and add4x8, and the output is s(31 downto 0). Refer toTable 10.4 for operation; you do not need to handle subtraction or overflow.
Table 10.4. Output specification for the vector adder of Exercise 10.22
add2x16 add4x8 Result
0 0 s(31downto0) = a(31downto0) + b(31downto0)
1 0 s(31downto16) = a(31downto16) + b(31downto16)
s(15downto0) = a(15downto0) + b(15downto0)
0 1 s(31downto24) = a(31downto24) + b(31downto24)
. . .
s(7downto0) = a(7downto0) + b(7downto0)
1 1 s(31downto0) = 32sb“−”
You may not simply implement Table 10.4 as a case or case? statement.10.23BCD addition, design. Design a circuit that accepts two three-digit (12-bit) BCDnumbers (Equation (10.6)) and outputs their sum as a BCD number.

--- Page 359 ---
10.24BCD addition, implementation. Code your BCD adder from Exercise 10.23 inVHDL and verify its operation with a testbench.10.25Negative numbers, I. Express +17 as an eight-bit sign-magnitude, 1’s complement,and 2’s complement binary number.10.26Negative numbers, II. Express −17 as an eight-bit sign-magnitude, 1’s complement,and 2’s complement binary number.10.27Negative numbers, III. Express −31 as an eight-bit sign-magnitude, 1’s complement,and 2’s complement binary number.10.28Negative numbers, IV. Express −32 as an eight-bit sign-magnitude, 1’s complement,and 2’s complement binary number.10.29Subtraction, I. Subtract the following pairs of 2’s complement binary numbers:
10.30Subtraction, II. Subtract the following pairs of 2’s complement binary numbers:
10.31Subtraction, III. Subtract the following pairs of 2’s complement binary numbers:
10.32Subtraction, IV. Subtract the following pairs of 2’s complement binary numbers:
10.331’s complement adder, design. Design an adder for 1’s complement numbers. (Hint:first add the two numbers normally. If there is a carry out of this first add, you needto increment the result to give the correct answer. While the straightforward solutionrequires an adder and an incrementer, it can be done with a single adder.)10.341’s complement adder, implementation. Write VHDL code for your 1’s complementadder (Exercise 10.33) and demonstrate its correct operation by simulating it onrepresentative test cases.10.35Saturating 2’s complement adder, design. In Exercise 10.20 we saw how to build asaturating adder for positive numbers. In this exercise you are to extend this designso that it handles negative numbers – saturating both in the positive direction and inthe negative direction. On overflows in the positive direction your adder is togenerate 2n−2 − 1, and on overflows in the negative direction it should generate
−2n−2.10.36Saturating 2’s complement adder, implementation. Write VHDL code for yoursaturating 2’s complement adder (Exercise 10.35) and demonstrate its correctoperation by simulating it on representative test cases.

--- Page 360 ---
10.37Sign-magnitude adder, design. Design a circuit that accepts two sign-magnitudebinary numbers and outputs their sum, also in sign-magnitude form.10.38Sign-magnitude adder, implementation. Write VHDL code for your sign-magnitudeadder of Exercise 10.37 and demonstrate its correct operation by simulating it onrepresentative test cases.10.39Non-standard signed representation. Consider a four-bit representation that canrepresent numbers from −4 to 11. Each negative number is represented by its normal2’s complement representation, e.g., −4 = 1100. Similarly, each positive number isrepresented by its normal binary representation, e.g., 11 = 1011.(a)Draw a number wheel (see Figure 10.9) for this representation.
(b)Draw an adder that operates on these numbers and detects overflow.
(c)Explain how to negate one of these numbers.
10.40Multiplication, I. Multiply the following pair of unsigned binary numbers:
10.41Multiplication, II. Multiply the following pair of unsigned binary numbers:
10.42Multiplication, III. Multiply the following pair of unsigned binary numbers:
10.43Multiplication, IV. Multiply the following pair of unsigned hexadecimal numbers:
10.44Five-times circuit. Using adders, combinational building blocks, and gates, design acircuit that accepts a four-bit 2’s complement binary input a(3 downto 0) andoutputs a seven-bit 2’s complement output b(6 downto 0) that is five times thevalue input. You cannot use a multiplier building block. Use the minimum number ofadder bits possible.10.45Fifteen-times circuit. Using adders, combinational building blocks, and gates, designa circuit that accepts a four-bit 2’s complement binary input a(3 downto 0) andoutputs an eight-bit 2’s complement output b(7 downto 0) that is 15 times the valueinput. You cannot use a multiplier building block. Use the minimum number ofadder bits possible.10.46Sixteen-times circuit. Design a circuit that accepts an eight-bit 2’s complementbinary input a(7 downto 0) and outputs a 12-bit 2’s complement output b(11
downto 0) that is 16 times the value input. Use as little logic as possible.10.47BCD multiplication, design. Design a circuit that accepts two three-digit (12-bit)BCD numbers (see Equation (10.6)) and outputs their product as a BCD number.

--- Page 361 ---
10.48BCD multiplication, implementation. Code your design from Exercise 10.47 inVHDL and verify its operation with a testbench.10.49Circuit design. Using adders, combinational building blocks, and gates, design acircuit that accepts the four inputs a, b, c, and d and outputs the expression a−b+(c×d). Input a is a four-bit 2’s complement number. Input b is a four-bit 1’scomplement number. Input c is a two-bit unsigned number. Input d is a four-bitunsigned number.10.502’s complement multiplier, design. Design a multiplier for 2’s complement binarynumbers. Consider two approaches:(a)Sign extend the partial products to deal with input a being negative and add a“complementer” to negate the last set of partial products if b is negative.
(b)Convert the two inputs to sign-magnitude notation, multiply unsigned numbers, andconvert the result back to 2’s complement.
Compare the cost and performance (delay) of the two approaches. Select theapproach that gives the lowest cost and show its design in terms of basic components(gates, adders, etc.)10.512’s complement multiplier, implementation. Write VHDL code for your 2’scomplement multiplier from Exercise 10.50 and demonstrate its correct operation bysimulating it on representative test cases.10.52Binary division, I. Divide the following pair of unsigned binary numbers (show eachstep of the process): 1011102 ÷ 1012.
10.53Binary division, II. Divide the following pair of unsigned binary numbers (showeach step of the process): 1011102 ÷ 0112.
10.54Binary division, III. Divide the following pair of unsigned hexadecimal numbers(show each step of the process): AE16 ÷ E16.
10.55Binary division, IV. Divide the following pair of unsigned hexadecimal numbers(show each step of the process): F716 ÷ 616.
10.56Subtractor widths for dividers. For each of the following pairs of argument widths,determine the width of subtractor needed in each stage of a divider:(a)dividend four bits, divisor four bits;
(b)dividend six bits, divisor four bits;
(c)dividend four bits, divisor three bits.
1 In Exercise 10.33 we see how a 1’s complement adder can be built by using an end-around carry.2 Sign-magnitude addition of negative numbers is performed by first converting to 1’s complement or 2’s complement3 We shall see below that we can accomplish the same function by comparing the carry into the last bit with the carry outof the last bit.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 362 ---
11
Fixed- and floating-point numbers
In Chapter 10 we introduced the basics of computer arithmetic: adding,
subtracting, multiplying, and dividing binary integers. In this chapter we
continue our exploration of computer arithmetic by looking at number
representation in more detail. Often integers do not suffice for our needs.
For example, suppose we wish to represent a pressure that varies between
0 (vacuum) and 0.9 atmospheres with an error of at most 0.001
atmospheres. Integers don’t help us much when we need to distinguish
0.899 from 0.9. For this task we will introduce the notion of a binary
point (similar to a decimal point) and use fixed-point binary numbers.
In some cases, we need to represent data with a very large dynamic
range. For example, suppose we need to represent time intervals ranging
from 1 ps (10−12 s) to one century (about 3 × 109 s) with an accuracy of
1%. To span this range with a fixed-point number would require 72 bits.
However, if we use a floating-point number – in which we allow the
position of the binary point to vary – we can get by with 13 bits: six bits
to represent the number and seven bits to encode the position of the
binary point.
11.1 REPRESENTATION ERROR:
ACCURACY, PRECISION, AND
RESOLUTION

--- Page 363 ---
With digital electronics, we represent a number, x, as a string of bits, b.
Many different number systems are used in digital systems. A number
system can be thought of as two functions R and V. The representation
function R maps a number x from some set of numbers (e.g., real numbers,
integers, etc.) into a bit string b: b = R(x). The value function V returns the
number (from the same set) represented by a particular bit string: y = V(b).
Consider mapping to and from the set of real numbers in some range.
Because there are more possible real numbers than there are bit strings of a
given length, many real numbers necessarily map to the same bit string.
Thus, if we map a real number to a bit string with R and then back with V
we will almost always get a slightly different real number than we started
with. That is, if we compute y = V(R(x)) then y and x will differ. The
difference is the error of the representation. We can express error either in
an absolute sense (e.g., the representation has an error of 2 mm), or relative
to the magnitude of the number (e.g., the representation has an error of 3%).
We express the absolute error of a representation at a point x as
ea = |V(R(x)) − x|, (11.1)
and the relative error as
(11.2)
The quality of a number representation is given by its accuracy or
precision,1 the maximum error over its input range X. The absolute
accuracy is given by
(11.3)
and the relative accuracy is

--- Page 364 ---
(11.4)
Naturally, the relative accuracy is not defined near x = 0. When we want to
represent numbers economically with a given relative accuracy, floating-
point numbers are often used. When we want to represent numbers
economically with a given absolute accuracy, fixed-point numbers are more
efficient. We describe these two representations in the following sections.
Sometimes people refer to the number of bits used in a number system,
its length (the term precision is often misused for length; e.g., saying a
system has 32-bit precision). At other times, people refer to the smallest
difference that can be distinguished by the number system, the resolution of
the system. When determining the quality of the representation, neither
length nor resolution is useful. What matters is accuracy.
For example, suppose we represent real numbers over the range X =[0,
1000] as ten-bit binary integers by representing each real number with the
nearest integer. Picking the nearest integer to a real number is often referred
to as rounding the real number to an integer. We would then represent
512.742 as 513 or 10000000012, and the error of representing this number
would be ea(512.742) =|512.742 − 513| =0.258. The error over the entire
range is aa(X) = 0.5 since a value halfway between two integers, e.g.,
512.500, has this much error whether it is rounded up or down. Note that
the error here depends on the representation function R. If we choose R so
that each number x is represented by the nearest integer less than x, then we
get ea(512.742) = 0.742 and aa(X) = 1. For positive real numbers, applying
this second representation function is often referred to as truncating the real
number to an integer.
Again, one should not confuse accuracy with resolution. The resolution
of both the rounding and truncating representations discussed above is 1.0 –
integers are spaced one unit apart. However, the accuracy of rounding is
0.5, and the accuracy of truncation is 1.0.
EXAMPLE 11.1 Calculating accuracy
In Section 1.3 we represented temperatures between 68 and 82 as a three-bit number, where

--- Page 365 ---
For this representation, find the absolute accuracy, relative accuracy, and resolution of this scheme.
Compute these values only for numbers between 68 and 82 and assume rounding.
The resolution, or weighted value of the LSB, in this scheme is 2. The absolute accuracy aa is 1.
For example, the value 79 is rounded up to 80 and |79 − 80| =1. Numbers between 68 and 70,
specifically 69, have the lowest relative accuracy:
This representation has 1.4% accuracy for numbers between 68 and 82.
EXAMPLE 11.2 Representation design
What is the resolution needed to represent numbers from 54 500 000 km to 4 500 000 000 km with
3% accuracy? This is the range of numbers representing the distance between the Sun and Mercury,
and the Sun and Neptune, respectively. Assume a rounding scheme.
The maximum error will be halfway between 54 500 000 and 54 500 000 + r, wherer represents
our resolution. So
To achieve our goal, the LSB in our representation needs to represent 3 370 000 km or less. The
value function for calculating the represented distance D from an 11-bit representation with an LSB
weight of 3 000 000 km is
11.2 FIXED-POINT NUMBERS

--- Page 366 ---
11.2.1Representation
A b-bit binary fixed-point number is a representation where the value of the
number an−1, an−2, ..., a1, a0 is given by
(11.5)
where p is a constant giving the position of the binary point – in bits from
the left end of the number.
Consider, for example, a fixed-point number system with n = 4 bit
numbers, with the binary point to the right of the most significant bit at p =
1. That is, there are three bits to the right of the binary point – the fractional
part of the number – and one bit to the left of the binary point – the integral
part of the number. We often use the shorthand p.f to refer to the integral
and fractional bits of a number. Using this shorthand, the system with n = 4
and p = 1 is a 1.3 fixed-point system. If we add an additional sign bit to the
left of the integral bits, we will refer to the resulting (p + f + 1)-bit system
as an sp.f system. We use 2’s complement numbers in sp.f systems.
The number of fractional bits, f = n−p, determines the resolution of our
number system. The resolution, or the smallest interval we can distinguish,
is r = 2−f. With f = 3, for example, our 1.3 fixed-point system has a
resolution of 1/8, or 0.125. Each increment of the binary number changes
the value represented by 1/8. The number of integral bits, p, determines the
range of our number system. The largest number we can represent with our
system is 2p−r. For a signed number system, the lowest (most negative, not
closest to zero) number we can represent is −2p. The range and precision are
sometimes easier to see if we rewrite Equation (11.5) as follows:
(11.6)
To convert a binary fixed-point number to decimal, we just convert it into
an integer and multiply by r. Table 11.1 shows some example fixed-point

--- Page 367 ---
numbers and their conversion to decimal and fractional representations.
To convert a decimal number to a fixed-point binary number, the easiest
approach is to (a) multiply the decimal number by 2f, (b) round the resulting
product to the nearest whole integer, and (c) convert the resulting decimal
integer to a binary integer. For example, suppose we want to convert 1.389
to our 1.3 fixed-point format. We first multiply by 8, giving 11.112. Then
we round to 11, and convert to binary, giving 1.011, which represents 1.375.
Hence our error in this representation (the difference between the
represented value and the actual value) is 1.389−1.375 = 0.014, or just over
1% of the actual value. If we always round to the nearest value, the largest
error over all values in the range (the accuracy of the representation) should
be r/2 – in this case, 0.0625. As we get closer to zero, this error as a
percentage of the value being represented grows. For numbers close to zero,
the error is 100%.
While a decimal integer can be converted into a binary integer with zero
error, a decimal fraction cannot, in general, be converted into a finite-length
binary fraction without error. Because 5 does not evenly divide any power
of 2, 0.110 cannot be exactly represented as a finite-length binary fraction.
Decimal fractions that represent powers of 2, like 0.25, 0.125, etc., can be
exactly represented as binary fractions. However, other decimal fractions,
such as 0.1 or 0.389, cannot be exactly represented. As you add more bits,
the error becomes smaller, but it is never zero. If zero error is required, the
number can be scaled (e.g., by 1000), or a BCD representation can be used.
Table 11.1. Example fixed-point numbers
Format Number r Integer Value
1.3 1.011 0.125 11 1.375 (11/8)
s1.3 01.011 0.125 11 1.375 (11/8)
s1.3 11.011 0.125 −5 −0.625 (−5/8)
2.4 10.0111 0.0625 39 2.4375 (39/16)
Fixed-point binary numbers are often used in signal processing
applications – for example, to process audio and video streams. In these
applications, the range and precision are well known, and the binary point
can be placed so that the full range of the number system is used while
eliminating (or minimizing) the possibility of an overflow. Typically the

--- Page 368 ---
values being represented are scaled so they fall between −1 and 1 so they
can be represented in ans0.f format. For most signal processing, 16 bits
suffice and an s0.15 format is used.
Consider our example of representing a voltage between 0 and 10 V with
10 mV precision. Suppose we would like this representation to use the
fewest bits possible. It is clear that we will need four bits to the left of the
binary point to represent 10. To achieve 10 mV precision, we will need 20
mV resolution. Hence we need six bits to the right of the binary point –
giving us a resolution of 2−6 = 0.015625 and a precision of 2−7 =
0.0078125. Thus, a 4.6 fixed-point format can directly represent this range
of voltages to the specified precision using ten bits.
An alternative representation would be to use a scaled number. If we use
a nine-bit binary number, we can represent values from 0 to 511. If we then
scale this number by 20 mV – i.e., a count of 1 corresponds to 20 mV – we
can then represent our 10 V range with 10 mV precision with just nine bits.
EXAMPLE 11.3 Conversion to binary fixed-point
Convert the number 4.23 into each of the following fixed-point schemes, and then convert back to
decimal. Assume full rounding.
(1) s4.2;
(2) s4.5;
(3) 12-bit, where we represent the number ×100.
The conversion of the integer portion of the number to decimal is trivial: 410 = 1002. We find the
fractional portion of the number using a methodology similar to how we convert integer numbers:
Note that we cannot precisely represent the fractional 0.23 in a finite amount of binary fraction
bits. To represent this value as an s4.2 number, we round the fractional portion of the number to
0.012, giving an answer of 00100.01. Converting this number back to decimal gives 4.2510. Thes4.5

--- Page 369 ---
version of the number is 00100.001112 or 4.2187510. Finally, scaling 4.23 × 100 = 42310 =
001101001112.
EXAMPLE 11.4 Designing a fixed-point system
Describe the number of bits needed to represent the distances from 0 to 31 AU with a precision of
0.05 AU.
Since all the numbers in this representation are positive, a sign bit is not necessary. We need only
four bits to represent the integral numbers 0–31. With a rounding scheme, we need a resolution of 0.1
AU or lower. Since 2−4 < 0.1, we use four bits for the fractional portion of our number. Thus, our
final format is eight bits: 4.4.
11.2.2Operations
We can perform the four basic operations on fixed-point binary numbers
just as if they were integers. The same arithmetic circuits as those described
in Chapter 10 can be used. However, we need to be careful to consider that
the range and precision of the results of arithmetic operations may be
different than the range and precision of the inputs.
Adding two p.f fixed-point numbers gives a result that is a (p+1).f fixed-
point number. If we wish to force the result to be a p.f fixed-point number,
we may encounter an overflow condition in which the result is outside of
our representable range. For example, consider our 4.6 fixed-point
representation for representing voltages. If we add two voltages together,
we will get a result between 0 and 20 V. A 5.6 fixed-point representation is
required in order to represent this full range.
When adding sequences of fixed-point numbers, the numbers are often
added using a greater range and then scaled and rounded to fit into the
desired range and precision for the result. For example, suppose we have 16
values we wish to sum up, each in s4.6 fixed-point format and each
representing a voltage between −10 V and 10 V. However, we know the
sum will result in a number between −10 and 10. We perform the
summation using s8.6 format to avoid any overflows on intermediate results
and then convert back to s4.6 format at the end. In some cases, this final
conversion is performed using saturation, where the value is clamped to the
maximum representable value if it is out of range. (See Exercise 10.20.)
To add two fixed-point numbers with different representations, it is
necessary first to align the binary points of the two numbers. This is most
often achieved by converting both numbers to a fixed-point representation

--- Page 370 ---
that has both p and f large enough to overlap both representations. For
example, consider adding the 2.3 format number 01.101 to the 3.2 format
number 101.01 We first convert both numbers to 3.3 format and then add
001.101 + 101.010, giving 110.111.
When we multiply two fixed-point numbers, the result has twice as many
bits on both sides of the binary point as the inputs. For example, if we
multiply two 4.6 fixed-point numbers, the result will be an 8.12 fixed-point
number. For example, suppose we multiply a voltage signal with a range of
10 V and a precision of 10 mV by a current signal with a range of 10 A and
a precision of 10 mA – both of these signals are in 4.6 format. The result is
a power signal with a range of 100 W and a precision of 100 μW – in 8.12
format.
Many signal processors scale numbers to a 0.16 format (or s0.15 for
signed numbers). Multiplying two 0.16 numbers gives a 0.32 number. A
common operation is to take a dot product of two vectors in 0.16 format. To
allow this operation to take place with no loss of precision, many popular
signal processors have 40-bit accumulators. They accumulate up to 256
0.32 multiplication results, giving a sum in 8.32 format. (For signed
numbers, the result is in s8.30 format.) This sum is then usually scaled and
rounded to get a final result back in 0.16 format.
In most cases, a result calculated to a high precision eventually must be
rounded to the original precision. Rounding is the process of reducing the
precision of a number by discarding some of the rightmost bits of the
number. When rounding decimal numbers to the nearest integer, we know
that we should always round up if the next digit is a 5 or more and down if
it is a 4 or less. Binary rounding works the same way. We round up if the
most significant bit discarded is a 1 and down if it is a 0. For example, the
number .10001000 in 0.8 format is rounded to .1001 in 0.4 format, while
.10000111 in 0.8 format is rounded to .1000 in 0.4 format. Rounding
requires an add (or at least an increment) to increment the result when
rounding up – hence its not a free operation. The rounding can potentially
change all of the remaining bits. For example, rounding .01111000 in 0.8 to
0.4 yields .1000.
EXAMPLE 11.5 Fixed-point operations
Add, subtract, and multiply the s2.3 number 010.001 and s0.4 number 0.1011, leaving the result in
full precision.
First, we add after aligning the binary point:

--- Page 371 ---
To subtract, we add the 2’s complement of 0.1011: 1.0101. We must sign extend this number when
aligning the values:
Finally, we compute the multiplication:
The final format of the product is s2.7: 001.01110112.
11.3 FLOATING-POINT NUMBERS
11.3.1Representation
High-dynamic-range numbers are often represented in floating-point
format. In particular, a floating-point format is efficient for representing a
number when we need a fixed proportional (not absolute) precision.
A floating-point number has two components; the exponent e and the
mantissa m. The value represented by a floating point number is given by
(11.7)

--- Page 372 ---
where m is a binary fraction, e is a binary integer, and x is a bias on the
exponent that is used to center the dynamic range. The mantissa, m, is a
fraction – meaning that the binary point is left of the MSB of m.
Theexponent, e, is an integer – its binary point is to the right of its LSB. If
the bits of m are mn−1, ..., m0 and the bits of e are ek−1, ..., e0, the value is
given by
(11.8)
We refer to a floating-point number system with an a-bit mantissa and a
b-bit exponent as an aEb format. For example, a system with a five-bit
mantissa and a three-bit exponent is a 5E3 system. We will also use the “E”
notation to write numbers. For example, the 5E3 number with a mantissa of
10010 and an exponent of 011 is 10010E011. Assuming zero bias, this
number has a value of v = 18/32 × 8 = 4.5.
We could also represent 4.5 as 01001E100 (9/32 × 16). Most floating-
point number systems disallow this second representation of 4.5 by insisting
that all floating-point numbers be normalized by shifting the mantissa left
(and decrementing the exponent) until either there is a 1 in the MSB of the
mantissa or the exponent is 0. With normalized numbers we can quickly
check for equality by simply comparing two numbers bit-by-bit. If numbers
are unnormalized they must first be normalized (or at least aligned) before
they can be compared. Some number systems take advantage of
normalization by omitting the MSB of the mantissa, since it is almost
always 1 (see Exercise 11.23).
Typically, when a floating-point number is stored, the exponent is stored
to the left of the mantissa. For example, 11001E011 would be stored in
eight bits as 01111001. Storing the exponent to the left allows integer
comparison to work on floating-point numbers as long as numbers are
normalized. That is, for two floating-point numbers a and b,ifa > b then ia >
ib, where ia and ib are the integer interpretations of the bits of a and b,
respectively.
If we want to represent signed values, we typically add a sign bit to the
left of the exponent. For example, in eight bits we can represent an S4E3

--- Page 373 ---
number which, from left to right, would contain a sign bit, a three-bit
exponent, and then a four-bit mantissa (SEEEM-MMM). In this
representation, the bit string 11001001 represents −9E4 or (with zero bias)
−9/16 × 24 = −9.
Floating-point numbers are just scientific notation applied to binary
numbers. Like scientific notation, floating-point numbers have an error that
is proportional to the magnitude of the number. For this reason, floating-
point numbers are an efficient way to represent values with a specified
proportional accuracy – particularly when the values in question have a
high dynamic range.
For example, suppose we need to represent times from 1 ns to 1000 s
with an accuracy of 1%. At the low end of this range we need an accuracy
of 10 ps and at the high end of the range we need to represent 1000 s, i.e.,
1014 times the required accuracy at the low end. A fixed-point
representation would require 46 bits (10.36) to represent 1000 s with 10 ps
accuracy (20 ps resolution). With a floating-point number, we can take
advantage of the fact that we need only an accuracy of 10 s (a resolution of
20 s) at the high end of the range. Hence our mantissa needs only six bits.
We can cover the large dynamic range (of 1012 < 240)by using a six-bit
exponent that can represent a range of 264. We set our exponent offset (x in
Equation (11.7)) to 54 so we can represent numbers up to 210. Hence we
can achieve the same relative accuracy with a 12-bit 6E6 floating-point
number as we can with a 46-bit 10.36 fixed-point number.
Just like unscaled fixed-point numbers, binary floating-point numbers
cannot exactly represent arbitrary decimal numbers – because 1/10 cannot
be exactly represented as a finite-length binary fraction. Thus, the value 0.3,
for example, can only be approximated in binary. This approximation can
be made arbitrarily precise by adding mantissa bits, but an error will always
remain. In applications where the error must be zero, BCD or a scaled
representation must be used.
EXAMPLE 11.6 Floating-point design
Design a floating-point scheme to represent a measurement of 1 × 10−6 to 1 × 107 with 5% error.
Represent the value 4.5 in this format.
We need a total of five mantissa bits in our scheme to represent the most significant 1 and the rest
of the mantissa to the needed precision. The smallest number to represent is 1 × 2−20, while the

--- Page 374 ---
largest is 1 × 224. We need a range in our exponent of at least 44, requiring six bits. The exponent
bias is 20.
Note that 4.5 is equal to 0.10010 × 23. In our format, this is represented as 10010E010111.
11.3.2Denormalized numbers and gradual underflow
If we disallow all denormalized numbers, we have a large gap in our
representation function in that the closest number to zero we can represent
(in 4E3, for example) is 1000E000, which with no bias represents 0.5. This
gives a large relative error for numbers smaller than 0.5. We can reduce this
relative error by allowing denormalized numbers only with an exponent of
0. We can then represent 1/4 as 0100E000, 1/8 as 0010E000, and 1/16 as
0001E000. In this case, the magnitude of the error for small numbers is
reduced by a factor of 8. In general, the error for small numbers is reduced
by a factor of 2n−1 for n-bit mantissas.
This representation is often referred to as gradual underflow because it
reduces the error due to underflow – when an arithmetic operation gives a
result closer to zero than the smallest number that can be represented. This
solves the problem of having multiple representations for the same number.
Because these denormalized numbers are restricted to have an exponent of
0, there is only one representation for each value.
To simplify the presentation, the arithmetic units we describe here do not
support gradual underflow. We leave their extension to support this
representation as Exercises 11.29 and 11.30.
11.3.3 Floating-point multiplication
Multiplying floating-point numbers is simple: we just multiply the
mantissas and add the exponents. This doubles the number of mantissa bits
and increments the number of exponent bits. We typically produce a result
in the same format as the inputs by rounding the mantissa (as described in
Section 11.2.2) and discarding the extra bit generated by the exponent add.
When the mantissa is rounded, the exponent must be adjusted to account for
the bits being dropped. If there is an exponent bias, the exponent must also
be adjusted to compensate for the effect of applying the bias twice. If the
number cannot be represented without an extra exponent bit, an overflow is
signaled. The increment required to round the mantissa may itself result in a

--- Page 375 ---
carry into the next mantissa bit position. If this occurs, the mantissa is
shifted right again, and the exponent incremented accordingly.
For example, consider multiplying 101E011 (5) by 101E100 (10), both in
3E3 format with no bias. Our goal is to produce a normalized result in the
same format. Our inputs are 101E011 and 101E100. Multiplying the
mantissas 101 and 101 gives 011001 (25/64), and adding the exponents 011
and 100 gives 111 (710). This is, in fact, the correct answer since 25/64 × 27
= 50. We now need to convert this result back to 3E3 format.
To give a three-bit normalized mantissa, we shift the mantissa left once
and discard the lowest two bits. The exponent is adjusted by decrementing
it once to 110. Because the most significant bit discarded is 0, no increment
is required for the rounding. Thus, our result in the original format is
110E110 (6/8 × 26 = 48). The error of 2 here was caused by dropping the
LSB of the mantissa during rounding.
EXAMPLE 11.7 Floating-point multiplication
Multiply the following two numbers written in 4E3 with an exponent bias of 4:
1100E010 × 1100E110.
We first find the initial output exponent of 1002 by summing the two input exponents (10002) and
subtracting off the bias (1002). Next, we multiply the two mantissas, giving a product of 0.100100002
or 0.10012. No normalization is needed because our final answer is 1001E100.
Figure 11.1 shows a block diagram of a floating-point multiplier, and the
VHDL description of this multiplier is given in Figure 11.2. The FF1 block
in the figure finds the leftmost one bit in pm, the product out of the
multiplier. Because both inputs are normalized, this bit is guaranteed to be
one of the left two bits of the product. Hence, we can use pm[7] directly to
select which group of four bits from pm to use as sm, the shifted product.2
Signal rnd, the first discarded bit of pm, is used to determine whether a
rounding increment is needed. Signal xm, the rounded version of sm, is a
five-bit signal. Like pm, it is guaranteed to have a 1 in one of its most
significant two bits. Thus, we use its MSB xm(4) to select which group of
four bits to output as the normalized mantissa. Note that we are guaranteed
not to need another round after this final shift, since, if xm(4) is a 1, xm(0)
is guaranteed to be a 0 (see Exercise 11.26).

--- Page 376 ---
Figure 11.1. Floating-point multiplier with 3E4 inputs and output.

--- Page 377 ---
Figure 11.2. VHDL description of a floating-point multiplier.

--- Page 378 ---
11.3.4Floating-point addition/subtraction
Floating-point addition is slightly more involved than multiplication
because of the need to align the inputs and normalize the output. The
process has three steps: alignment, addition, and normalization. During the
alignment step the mantissa of the number with the smaller exponent is
shifted right to align it with the mantissa of the number with the larger
exponent – so bits of the same weight are aligned with one another. Once
the two mantissas are aligned, they can be added or subtracted as if they
were integers. This addition may produce a result that is unnormalized. A
carry out of the add may result in a mantissa that must be shifted right by
one bit for the most significant 1 to be placed into the MSB of the result.
Alternatively, a subtraction may leave many of the MSBs of the result 0,
requiring a left shift of an arbitrary number of bits to place the most
significant 1 into the MSB of the result. The normalization step finds the
most significant 1 of the result, shifts the result to place this 1 into the MSB
of the mantissa, and adjusts the exponent accordingly. If the normalization
is a right shift, it may discard one LSB of the result. A rounding increment
is needed to round, rather than truncate, when discarding this bit.
As an example of floating-point addition, suppose we wish to add the
numbers 5 and 11, both represented in 5E3 notation. In this notation, the
number 5 is 10100E011 and the number 11 is 10110E100. During the
alignment step, we shift the mantissa of 5 to the right by one bit to align it
with the mantissa of 11. In effect, we are rewriting 5 as 01010E100 –
denormalizing the mantissa to make the exponent agree with the other
argument. With the two arguments aligned, we can now add the mantissas.
There is a carry out of the mantissa add, giving a result of 100000E100 in
6E3 format. To normalize this result so it fits into 5E3 format, we shift the
mantissa to the right by one position and increment the exponent, giving the
final result of 10000E101, or 16.
As a second example, consider subtracting 9 from 10, both represented in
s5E3 format. Here, 9 is +10010E100 and 10 is +10100E100. The two
numbers have the same exponent, so they are already aligned. No shifting is
required before the subtraction. Subtracting the two numbers gives
00010E100, which is unnormalized. To normalize this number, we shift the
mantissa three places to the left and decrement the exponent by 3, giving
10000E001, or 1.

--- Page 379 ---
Aligning floating-point numbers before addition and subtraction causes
bits beyond the LSB of the larger number to be dropped. Because of this,
floating-point operations are not associative. For example, consider adding
a small value b to a large value A. Ifb is small enough, b + A = A. If we then
subtract A from this sum, we find (b + A) − A = 0. Subtracting first gives a
different answer: b + (A − A) = b.
EXAMPLE 11.8 Floating-point addition and subtraction
Add and subtract the following floating-point numbers written in 4E3 format with a bias of 4:
1100E100 + 1110E011;  1100E100 − 1110E011.
To perform the addition, we must first shift the smaller number to align the binary points:
After doing the addition, we had to normalize the sum, rounding up after shifting out a 1.
The subtraction follows a similar methodology, though we add the 2’s complement of the shifted
value being subtracted:
This time, the difference must be left-shifted to obtain the correct answer.
A block diagram of a floating-point adder is shown in Figure 11.3, and a
VHDL description of this adder is shown in Figure 11.4. The input
exponent logic compares the two exponents, generating signal agtb, to
determine which mantissa needs to be shifted, and signal de,which gives the
number of bits to shift. The input switch uses agtb to switch the two
mantissas so the mantissa with the greater exponent is on signal gm and the
mantissa with the smaller exponent is on signal lm. Mantissa lm is then
shifted by de to align the mantissas.3 The aligned mantissas are added,
producing signal sm, which is one bit wider than the mantissas. A reverse-

--- Page 380 ---
priority encoder is then used to find the most significant 1 in sm. A shift is
then performed to move this bit to the most significant position of the
result, giving signal nm. This shift ranges from a one-bit right-shift to a full-
width left-shift. Signal rnd captures the bit discarded on a right-shift by 1.
The exponent is adjusted to reflect the shift amount. If the exponent cannot
be represented in the given number of bits, an overflow occurs.
Figure 11.3. Floating-point adder.

--- Page 382 ---
Figure 11.4. VHDL description of a floating-point adder.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to select a number system that has
adequate range and accuracy for a particular application. We can express
the error of a representation in either absolute or relative terms. For a given
representation function R(x) we can compute the absolute and relative
errors of the representation at any point x. Theaccuracy of a representation
is the maximum error over the required range.
Fixed-point numbers have a fixed binary point with fractional bits to the
right of the binary point and integral bits to the left. For example, an s1.14
number is a 16-bit number with a sign bit, one integral bit to the left of the
binary point, and 14 fractional bits to the right of the binary point. Bits to
the right of the binary point have fractional value. In the s1.14
representation, the LSB is weighted 2−14. Operations on fixed-point
numbers are simpler than operations on floating-point numbers and, if
properly scaled, they have good absolute accuracy.
The value represented by a floating-point number is v = m × 2e−x,wherem
is the mantissa, e is the exponent, and x is the bias. Multiplying m by 2e−x
has the effect of allowing the binary point in m to float, hence the name.
Operations on floating-point numbers are more complex than on integer
numbers because of the need to align mantissas – so that similar bits have
similar weights – before adding. The advantage of floating-point numbers is
that they have greater relative accuracy than fixed-point numbers for a
given number of bits and required range. Floating-point numbers also allow
designers to be lazy and not scale their variables. The large range of the
floating-point number allows designers to defer the scaling to the hardware.
To have a single representation for each value, we generally insist that
floating-point numbers be normalized by shifting the mantissa left (and
decrementing the exponent accordingly) so that the MSB of the mantissa is
1. Since the MSB of the mantissa is always 1, we often omit it – we call this
an implied 1. To allow small numbers to be represented accurately, we
allow denormalized numbers when the exponent is 0 – this is called gradual
underflow.
Floating-point multiplication is performed by adding the exponents and
multiplying the mantissas. The result of the multiply must be rounded – to

--- Page 383 ---
fit into the required number of output bits – and normalized – so that the
most significant bit of the output is 1.
A floating-point addition operation requires that the mantissas first be
aligned –byshifting the mantissa with the smaller exponent right – so that
similar bits have similar weights. After the addition, the result must be
normalized – the result shifted so that it has a 1 in its MSB and the
exponent adjusted accordingly.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
For more information about floating-point formats, consult the IEEE
floating-point standard [58] and [54].
Exercises
11.1 Fixed-point representation, I. Convert the following fixed-point
number to decimal: 1.0101 in 1.4.
11.2 Fixed-point representation, II. Convert the following fixed-point
number to decimal: 11.0101 in s1.4.
11.3 Fixed-point representation, III. Convert the following fixed-point
number to decimal: 101.011 in 3.3.
11.4 Fixed-point representation, IV. Convert the following fixed-point
number to decimal: 101.011 in s2.3.
11.5 Fixed-point representation, I. Convert 1.5999 to the nearest fixed-
point s1.5 representation. Give the absolute and relative errors.
11.6 Fixed-point representation, II. Convert 0.3775 to the nearest fixed-
point s1.5 representation. Give the absolute and relative errors.
11.7 Fixed-point representation, III. Convert 1.109375 to the nearest
fixed-point s1.5 representation. Give the absolute and relative errors.
11.8 Fixed-point representation, IV. Convert −1.171875 to the nearest
fixed-point s1.5 representation. Give the absolute and relative errors.
11.9 Fixed-point representation, absolute error. Find a decimal value
between −1 and1for which the absolute value of the error of
representation as an s1.5 fixed-point number is maximum.
11.10Fixed-point representation, relative error. Find a decimal value
between 0.1 and 1 for which the percentage of the error of
representation as an s1.5 fixed-point number is maximum.

--- Page 384 ---
11.11 Selecting a fixed-point representation, I. You need to represent a
relative pressure signal with a range from −10 PSI to 10 PSI with an
accuracy of 0.1 PSI. Select a fixed-point representation that covers
this range with the specified accuracy with a minimum number of
bits.
11.12Selecting a fixed-point representation, II. Select a fixed-point
representation that covers a range from 0.001 to 1 with an accuracy
of 1% across the range and uses a minimum number of bits.
11.13Floating-point representation, I. Convert the following floating-
point number with a bias of 3 to decimal: 1111E111 in 4E3.
11.14Floating-point representation, II. Convert the following floating-
point number with a bias of 3 to decimal: 1010E100 in 4E3.
11.15Floating-point representation, III. Convert the following floating-
point number with a bias of 3 to decimal: 1100E001 in s3E3.
11.16Floating-point representation, IV. Convert the following floating-
point number with a bias of 3 to decimal: 0101E101 in s3E3.
11.17Floating-point representation, I. Convert −23 to s3E5 floating-point
format with a bias of 8. Give the relative and absolute errors.
11.18Floating-point representation, II. Convert 100 000 to s3E5 floating-
point format with a bias of 8. Give the relative and absolute errors.
11.19Floating-point representation, III. Convert 999 to s3E5 floating-
point format with a bias of 16. Give the relative and absolute errors.
11.20Floating-point representation, IV. Convert 64 to s3E5 floating-point
format with a bias of 16. Give the relative and absolute errors.
11.21Selecting a floating-point representation, I. Select a floating-point
representation that covers a range from −10 to 10 with an accuracy
of 0.1 for numbers with magnitudes > 1/32 using a minimum
number of bits.
11.22Selecting a floating-point representation, II. Select a floating-point
representation that covers a range from 0.001 to 100 000 000 with an
accuracy of 1% across the range and uses a minimum number of
bits.
11.23Implied 1. Many floating-point formats omit the MSB of the
mantissa. That is, they don’t bother to store it. The IEEE single-
precision floating-point standard, for example, stores a 24-bit
mantissa in 23 bits by omitting the MSB of the mantissa. This is
referred to as an implied 1. Some formats insist that this missing

--- Page 385 ---
MSB is always 1. However, this leads to interesting error behavior
near zero. Better error characteristics can be achieved (at some cost
in complexity) by implying that the MSB of the mantissa is 0, and
that the exponent is 1 − x when e is 0 (the same exponent as when e
is 1). A number system having this feature is said to provide gradual
underflow.
(a)  Suppose you have a 5E3 floating-point number system with a
bias x of 0 and an implied 1. (The mantissa consists of an implied
1 followed by four bits.) Plot the error curve over the interval [−2,
2] for a system without gradual underflow.
(b)  On the same axes as (a), plot the error curve for the same number
system but with gradual underflow.
(c)  At what value is the percentage error of the system without
gradual underflow largest?
(d)  Is there a value range in which the gradual underflow system has
a larger error than the system without gradual underflow? If so,
what is this range?
11.24Floating-point add with round bit. Fix the block diagram of Figure
11.3 and VHDL of Figure 11.4 to account for the potentially lost
round bit of lm. For example, adding 1.0000 × 20 + 1.1111 × 2−1
should output 1.0000 × 21 (rounded from 1.11111 × 20) instead of
1.1111 × 20. Create a new wire, guard, that represents the bit to the
right of alm’s LSB and add it into the sum sm if set.
11.25Floating-point subtract. Extend the floating-point adder shown in
Figures 11.3 and 11.4 to handle signed floating-point numbers and to
perform floating-point subtractions. Assume that the sign bit for each
input operand is provided on separate lines as and bs, and that the
sign of the result is to be output on line cs.
11.26Floating-point multiply. In Section 11.3.3 we stated that if the MSB
of the rounded product xm was a 1, then its LSB must be a 0.
However, we gave no justification for this claim. Prove that this is
true.
11.27Floating-point multiply with denormalized numbers. Modify the
design of the floating-point multiplier of Section 11.3.3 to work with
denormalized inputs.

--- Page 386 ---
11.28Floating-point addition with underflow. A floating-point add of two
normalized numbers may result in a number that cannot be
represented with a 1 in the MSB of the mantissa, but yet is not 0.
This situation is an underflow. Modify the adder of Section 11.3.4 to
detect and signal an underflow condition.
11.29Add with gradual underflow. Extend the adder design of Section
11.3.4 to handle gradual underflow; that is, to handle denormalized
inputs when the input exponent is 0.
11.30Multiply with gradual underflow. Extend the multiplier design of
Section 11.3.3 to handle gradual underflow.
11.31Gradual underflow and implied 1. Consider a system that uses a
representation with an implied 1 in the MSB of the mantissa, as
described in Exercise 11.23. Extend this system to allow numbers
with gradual underflow. Make sure that you do not create any gaps
or redundant representations in your system. (Hint: let exponents of
0 and 1 represent the same value, but one with an implied 1, and one
without.) Convert the following numbers to a 4E3 version of your
representation:
(a) 1/8,
(b)  4,
(c)  1/16,
(d)  32.
11.32Add with gradual underflow and implied 1. Extend the adder design
of Section 11.3.4 to handle gradual underflow with an implied 1
(Exercise 11.31).
11.33Multiply with gradual underflow and implied 1. Extend the
multiplier design of Section 11.3.3 to handle gradual underflow with
an implied 1 (Exercise 11.31).
11.34Logarithmic representation. Consider a number system where v =
be−x for a fixed base b. This system is like a floating-point
representation where the mantissa is always 1 and hence is omitted.
Consider the specific case where b = 21/8. Suppose you have to
represent voltages from 1 μV to 1 MV with a relative accuracy of
5%. How does this representation compare with fixed- and floating-
point representations in terms of the number of bits required?
1 We use the terms accuracy and precision interchangeably in this book.

--- Page 387 ---
2 The FF1 block in this case simply selects one bit out of pm as shown in the VHDL. With
denormalized numbers, however, a full priority encoder function is required.
3 The astute reader will notice that we have potentially shifted off and lost a round bit by making alm
5 bits instead of 6. Exercise 11.24 will ask you to fix that.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 388 ---
12
Fast arithmetic circuits
In this chapter, we look at three methods for improving the speed of
arithmetic circuits, and in particular multipliers. We start in Section 12.1
by revisiting binary adders and see how to reduce their delay from O(n) to
O(log(n)) by using hierarchical carry-look-ahead circuits. This technique
can be applied directly to build fast adders and is also used to accelerate
the summation of partial products in multipliers. In Section 12.2 we see
how the number of partial products that need to be summed in a multiplier
can be greatly reduced by recoding one of the inputs as a sequence of
higher-radix, signed digits. Finally, in Section 12.3 we see how the partial
products can be accumulated with O(log(n)) delay by using a tree of full
adders. The combination of these three techniques into a fast multiplier is
left as Exercises 12.17 to 12.20.
12.1 CARRY LOOK-AHEAD
Recall that the adder developed in Section 10.2 is called a ripple-carry adder
because a transition on the carry signal must ripple from bit to bit to affect
the final value of the MSB of the sum. This ripple-carry results in an adder
delay that increases linearly with the number of bits in the adder. For large
adders, this linear delay becomes prohibitive.
We can build an adder with a delay that increases logarithmically, rather
than linearly, with the width of the adder by using a dual-tree structure as
shown in Figure 12.1. This circuit worksbycomputingcarrypropagate and
carry generate across groups of bits in the upper tree and then using these
signals to generate the carry signal into each bit in the lower tree. The

--- Page 389 ---
propagate signal pij is true if a carry into bit i will propagate from bit i to bit j
and generate a carry out of bit j. The generate signal gij is true if a carry will
be generated out of bit j regardless of the carry into bit i. We can define p
and g recursively as follows:
pij = pik ∧  p(k+1)j ( ∀k : i <= k < j), (12.1)
pii = pi = ai ⊕  bi, (12.2)
gij = (gik ∧  p(k+1)j) ∨  g(k+1)j ( ∀k : i <= k < j), (12.3)
gii = gi = ai ∧  bi. (12.4)
Figure 12.1. Block diagram of a carry-look-ahead circuit. Each pg signal represents two bits, a p bit,
which specifies that the carry propagates across the specified bit range, and a g bit, which specifies

--- Page 390 ---
that the carry is generated out of the specified bit range. The pg signals are combined in a tree to span
increasing ranges of bits. The pg signals are then used in a second tree to generate the carry, c, signals
for each bit.
The first two equations define the propagate signals. A carry signal will
propagate across a range of bits from i to j if it propagates from i to k (pik)
and then from k + 1toj (p(k+1)j). This works for any choice of k from i to j −
1. Of course, we usually split our intervals evenly, choosing k = ⌊ (i + j)/2 ⌋ .
When our interval is down to a single bit, we compute pii, or just pi, as
discussed in conjunction with Figure 10.3. The carry propagates across a
single bit i when exactly one input to that bit is true (i.e., when ai ⊕  bi).
The first generate equation states that a carry signal will be generated out
of bit j regardless of the carry into bit i if either (1) it is generated out of k
regardless of the carry into i and then propagated across bits k + 1toj, or (2)
it is generated out of bit j regardless of the carry into bit k + 1. The base case
for generate is as discussed in Figure 10.3. The carry is generated out of a
single bit only when both inputs to that bit are high.
It is easy to construct the top part of the carry circuit of Figure 12.1 by
using Equations (12.1)–(12.4). For the eight-bit carry circuit in the figure,
we would like to know what the carry out of bit 7, c8, is. Hence we would
like to compute p07 and g07. To simplify the drawing, we refer to these two
signals collectively as pg07. We choose k = 3 and compute pg07 from pg03
and pg47. The logic of the block labeled PG is that of Equations (12.1) and
(12.3), and is shown in Figure 12.2. We then recursively subdivide each of
these intervals until we bottom out at the single-bit p and g terms.
Figure 12.2. Logic to recursively generate propagate, pij, and generate, gij, signals across a group of
bits from i to j as a function of the p and g signals across adjacent subranges ik and (k + 1)j.
Once we have generated the pg signals recursively, we use these signals to
generate the carries. We proceed to build a tree, starting with the carry across
all eight bits, then groups of four, two, and one. At each level, we compute
the carry from carries at the previous levels and the pg signals as follows:

--- Page 391 ---
cj+1 = gij ∨  (ci ∧  pij). (12.5)
The logic in each of the C blocks of Figure 12.1 is that of Equation (12.5),
and is shown in Figure 12.3.
Figure 12.3. Logic to generate carry signals from upper-level carry signals and pg signals.
VHDL code for the eight-bit carry-look-ahead circuit of Figure 12.1,
along with logic that generates p and g from adder inputs a and b, is shown
in Figure 12.4. The code includes the equations for the input, PG, and C
blocks directly, rather than defining modules for each block type and
instantiating each of them separately. In this case, coding with equations
makes the code easier both to write and to understand.

--- Page 393 ---
Figure 12.4. VHDL description of an eight-bit carry-look-ahead circuit. The code generates many
unused intermediate signals, which are optimized out by the synthesizer.
The VHDL code in Figure 12.4 generates many unused signals. For
example, pairwise propagate signals pi(i+1), named p2(i) in the code, are
generated for all eight bits even though only the even bits are needed.
Similarly, four-bit wide propagate and generate signals p4 and g4 are
generated for all eight bits, even though only bits 0 and 4 are used, and
eight-bit wide propagate and generate signals p8 and g8 are generated, and
only bit 0 is used. This coding style makes it easier to write the equations,
and it is not wasteful because the synthesizer optimizes away the unused
signals and any logic needed only to generate them.
The circuit of Figures 12.1 and 12.4 uses a fan-in of 2. That is, p and g
signals at each level are combined pairwise to form the p and g signals at the
next level. Depending on the optimal fan-in and fan-out of one stage of logic
in the technology at hand (see Sections 5.2 and 5.3), it may be faster to build
a carry-look-ahead circuit with a larger fan-in. For example, Figure 12.5
shows a 16-bit carry-look-ahead circuit with a fan-in of 4.

--- Page 394 ---
Figure 12.5. Sixteen-bit carry-look-ahead circuit with a fan-in, or radix, of4.
VHDL for the circuit of Figure 12.5 is shown in Figure 12.6. In contrast to
Figure 12.4, which implements the look-ahead equations directly, this
module is coded using submodules (shown in Figure 12.7) to implement the
four-bit wide PG and carry functions. For the radix-4 case, this makes the
code more readable.

--- Page 396 ---
Figure 12.6. VHDL description of the 16-bit, radix-4 carry-look-ahead unit of Figure 12.5.
Figure 12.7. Four-bit PG and Carry modules for the carry-look-ahead module of Figure 12.6.
Of course, the fan-in, or radix, of a carry-look-ahead circuit need not be a
power of 2. One can build carry-look-ahead circuits with fan-ins of 3, 5, 6,
or any other value. In some cases, better performance is achieved with a
mixed-radix design, in which a larger fan-in is used in the earlier stages
(where wires are short) and a smaller fan-in is used in the later stages (where
wires are longer) – to balance the larger electrical effort associated with the
long wires with a smaller logical effort due to the fan-in (see Section 5.3).

--- Page 397 ---
While we have illustrated carry look-ahead in the context of an adder, the
technique can be applied to any one-dimensional iterative function. Arbiters
(see Section 8.5) and comparators (see Section 8.6), for example, can be
realized with delay that increases as the log of the number of inputs using a
look-ahead tree. All that is required is to write the logic of the iterative
circuit in propagate–generate form:
pi = fp(ai, bi, ...), (12.6)
gi = fg(ai, bi, ...), (12.7)
ci+1 = gi ∨  (pi ∧  ci), (12.8)
oi = fo(ci, ai, bi, ...). (12.9)
For example, a magnitude comparator with carry propagating from LSB
to MSB in propagate–generate can be put in propagate–generate form:
pi = (ai ⊕  bi), (12.10)
gi = ai ∧  bi, (12.11)
o = cN. (12.12)
Using this formulation, we can build a 16-bit magnitude comparator with
only four levels of logic using the circuit of Figure 12.5. Because the
magnitude comparator needs only the MSB of the carry for its output, the
Carry blocks in Figure 12.5 can be omitted.
When writing VHDL, it is more important to describe other functions
using a carry-look-ahead formulation than it is to describe an adder with this
formulation. Modern synthesis tools are very good at taking the VHDL code
s <= a + b;

--- Page 398 ---
and expanding this into a highly optimized adder, including carry look-ahead
if appropriate for the constraints. Synthesis tools will not perform this
optimization for other functions such as priority encoders and comparators.
We look at some other example applications of carry-look-ahead circuits
in Exercises 12.2 to 12.4.
12.2 BOOTH RECODING
The unsigned binary multiplier described in Section 10.4 generates mn-bit
partial products and requires m × (n − 1) full adder cells to sum these partial
products into a final result. We can reduce the number of partial products by
a factor of 2 (or more) using Booth recoding. As an added bonus, the
recoding easily handles 2’s complement signed inputs.
Radix-2i recoding works by reinterpreting an n-bit multiplier as an (n/i)-
digit radix-2i number. For example, we can reinterpret the six-bit binary
number b = 0110112 as the four-digit quaternary (radix-4) number 1234. To
multiply this number by another binary number, a = 0100112, we need to
sum only three partial products, as shown in Figure 12.8.
Figure 12.8. An example of multiplying a binary number by a quaternary number. Only three binary
partial products must be summed, compared with six for binary × binary multiplication.
This simple recoding requires that the partial products be selected from
shifted multiples of a up to 2i − 1. For example, multiples of a,2a,and3a are
required for the radix-4 multiplication discussed above. The value of 2a is
available with a simple shift, but 3a requires a shift and an addition. Even
with this addition to pre-compute 3a, the total number of full adders needed
to compute the product is reduced by almost a factor of 2.

--- Page 399 ---
Booth recoding eliminates the need for the pre-addition (for radix-4) and
naturally handles 2’s complement signed numbers. It does this by using
overlapping digits that are interpreted as signed numbers. Each digit is an (i
+ 1)-bit field and overlaps adjacent digits by one bit. Consider the bits of a
digit as a bit vector bi−1, bi−2, ..., b0, b−1. The MSB of each digit bi−1 is
weighted −(2i−1), the middle bits bj of each digit are each weighted 2j, and
the LSB of each digit b−1 is weighted 1. With the overlap, this weighting
maintains the correct total weighting of each bit in the recoded number.
Consider radix-4 Booth recoding an eight-bit 2’s complement number b7,
..., b0. We interpret this as a four-digit radix-4 number d3, ..., d0, where digit i
consists of the three bits b2i+1, b2i, and b2i−1 weighted by −2, 1, and 1,
respectively (and the whole digit is weighted by 4i). Summing the weights
for the overlapping bits gives the correct weight for a 2’s complement
number. For example, bit b1 is the MSB of digit d0, where it has weight −2,
and the LSB of digit d1, where it has weight 4; summing these values gives a
total weight of 2, the correct weight for b1. Table 12.1 illustrates how this
overlap also works for bits b3 and b5. The sum of the weights of each bit
below the line equals the weight above the line. To make the three-bit digit
d0 work out evenly, we assume a b−1 whichisalwayszero.
Table 12.1. Weights for radix-4 Booth recoding of an eight-bit binary number
Bit b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 b1 b0 b−1
weight −128 64 32 16 8 4 2 1 n/a
d3 −128 64 64
d2 −32 16 16
d1 −8 4 4
d0 −2 1 1
As illustrated in Table 12.2, each radix-4 digit di in the Booth recoded
multiplier can take on one of five values: −2, −1, 0, 1, or 2. Thus, we can
build a multiplier that generates half the number of partial products by using
each Booth recoded digit to select one of these five multiples of the
multiplicand as the partial product for that digit. All of these multiples of the

--- Page 400 ---
multiplicand can be generated with simple shifts (to multiply by 2) and
logical inversions (to perform a 2’s complement negation).
Table 12.2. Possible values for a radix-4 digit di
b2i+1 b2i b2i−1 di
0 0 0   0
0 0 1   1
0 1 0   1
0 1 1   2
1 0 0 −2
1 0 1 −1
1 1 0 −1
1 1 1   0
Figure 12.9 shows a six-bit × four-bit 2’s complement multiplier using
radix-4 Booth recoding. A VHDL implementation of this design is shown in
Figures 12.10 and 12.11.
Figure 12.9. A six-bit × four-bit 2’s complement multiplier using radix-4 Booth recoding.

--- Page 402 ---
Figure 12.10. VHDL code for the radix-4 Booth recoded multiplier of Figure 12.9.
Figure 12.11. Recode block for the Booth recoded multiplier of Figure 12.10.
At the left side of Figure 12.9, three recoder (R) blocks are used to recode
three-bit overlapping fields of input b5:0 into three signed quaternary digits
d0:2. Note that the least significant digit d0 is computed using b1, b0, and b−1
(which is always 0). The details of the recoding are shown in Figure 12.11.
Each recoded digit is represented as a three-bit field. The MSB encodes
whether the digit is negative, and the lowest two bits encode whether the
digit is 2 or 1. If the digit is 0, all three bits are low.
The output of each R block drives a row of select (S) blocks. The S
blocks, driven by di, perform a signed multiply of a3:0 by di by selectively
shifting (if di is ±2) and inverting (if di is −1 or−2). When di = ±1, the a
input must be sign extended to five bits to give a five-bit S block output with
the correct sign. The negation bit, di,2, must be added to the output of each

--- Page 403 ---
row of S blocks to complete the multiply – since 2’s complement negation
requires inverting a number and adding 1.
Even though operand a is only four bits wide, and the output of the S
blocks is only five bits wide, the addition used to complete the negation must
be six bits wide to handle all cases. Consider, for example, when a = −810 =
10002 and di = −2. The resulting partial product ppi =+1610 = 010000
requires six bits. Both inputs to the six-bit add must be sign extended to get
the correct result.
For each row of adders, the low two bits are used directly as outputs and
the upper four bits are sign extended to six bits and added with the next
row’s partial product, which is also sign extended to six bits. The final
output is a ten-bit 2’s complement number.
While our example performs radix-4 recoding, it is possible to recode with
a radix that is any power of 2. A radix-8 recoder uses overlapping four-bit
fields with bits weighted −4, 2, 1, 1 to generate octal digits with values
ranging from −4 to 4. A pre-adder is needed to generate 3a to be one of the
inputs to the S block.
A radix-16 recoder uses overlapping five-bit fields with weights −8, 4, 2,
1, 1 to generate hexadecimal digits with values ranging from −8 to 8. Pre-
adders are needed to generate values of 3a, 5a, and7a. The6a is generated by
the S blocks by shifting 3a. Radix-32, and even radix-64, recoders are also
possible and may be of interest for very large multipliers.
12.3 WALLACE TREES
The simple, unsigned multiplier of Figure 10.15 and the recoded multiplier
of Figure 12.9 both propagate the carry linearly through a series of adders
proportional to the size of the input. For asimplen-bit × m-bit multiplier, the
length of the carry chain is n + m − 2. For an n-bit × m-bit radix-4 Booth
multiplier, the length of the carry chain is n +m/2 + 1. We can reduce this
O(n) delay in accumulating partial products to an O(log(n)) delay by
organizing the adders in a tree, rather than linear arrays, to reduce the partial
products to at most two of each weight. A carry-look-ahead adder (see
Section 12.1) can then be used for the final summation.

--- Page 404 ---
Figure 12.12 shows a circuit that accumulates the partial products (labeled
ppij) for the four-bit by four-bit multiplier of Figure 10.15. The partial
products at the left of the figure are the outputs of the AND gates in Figure
10.15, signal ppij = ai ∧  bj. The Wallace tree, consisting of five full adders
(FA) and a half adder, reduces the partial products until there are at most two
of each weight. A carry-look-ahead adder then forms the final product with
delay logarithmic in the word length.


--- Page 405 ---
Figure 12.12. A Wallace tree to accumulate the partial products for the four-bit by four-bit simple,
unsigned multiplier of Figure 10.15.
In the figure, partial products are grouped vertically by weight. Dashed
lines separate the groups. Groups 0 and 1, weights of 1 and 2, have two or
fewer partial products, hence no reduction is required. These partial products
can be directly input to the carry-look-ahead adder.
Group 2, with weight 4, has three partial product bits (pp02, pp11, and
pp20) which are input to a full adder to produce one signal of weight 4,
w1a2, which is input to the carry-look-ahead adder, and one of weight 8,
w1a3 which is passed to the next group.
The intermediate signal names specify the stage of the signal and the log
of the signal weight, and identify the particular signal of this stage and
weight. For example, w1a3isinstage1,has weight 8, 23, and is the first signal
with these two properties (hence the label a).
Group 3, with weight 8, has four partial products. Three of these are input
to one full adder, and the fourth is passed to a second full adder in stage 2.
The second full adder combines two group 3, stage 1 signals, w1a3 and
w1b3, and the remaining group 3 input, pp30, to generate one group 3, stage
2 signal, w2a3, and one group 4, stage 2 signal, w2a4, both of which are
inputs to the carry-look-ahead adder.
The process continues with the remaining groups. Partial products and
intermediate signals in each group are reduced by full adders and one half
adder, until the number of signals in each group is two or fewer, at which
point they are input to the final carry-look-ahead adder.
Using full adders and half adders, each stage of our adder reduces partial
products, as shown in Table 12.3. The table shows how many outputs of
weights i and 2i are produced by one stage of full and half adders for each
number of inputs of weight i. For example, with six inputs of weight i, we
use two full adders to generate two outputs, each of weights i and 2i. In
some cases we have a choice as to whether to reduce or not. With two partial
products of a given weight, for example, we can just pass these inputs
directly through – perhaps to be input to the carry-look-ahead adder as in
group 1 of Figure 12.12 – or we can input them to a half adder to generate
one output each of weights i and 2i. Where it makes sense, this alternative
reduction is shown in the last two columns of the table.
Table 12.3. Reduction of number of partial products in one stage of a Wallace tree

--- Page 406 ---
Out Alternative
In i 2i i 2i
1 1 0
2 1 1 2 0
3 1 1
4 2 1
5 2 2
6 2 2
7 3 2
8 3 3 4 2
Using the reduction numbers from Table 12.3, Table 12.4 shows how the
partial products for an eight-bit by eight-bit simple, unsigned multiplier can
be reduced in four stages of full adders and half adders. The first row shows
the group number, log2 of the weight. The second row shows the number of
partial products (pps) in each group: the number of bits of a given weight
that need to be summed. The remaining rows show the number of signals of
each weight remaining after each stage of full adders. The entries are
calculated using the reduction rules of Table 12.3. Each number depends
only on the number directly above it and the number above and one column
to the right. For example, group 9 has four signals after stage 1. This
comprises two signals reduced from the six partial products in group 9 and
two additional signals that carry out of the reduction of seven partial
products in group 8.
Table 12.4. Wallace-tree accumulation of partial products for an eight-bit by eight-bit simple,
unsigned multiplier
The row labeled “pps” shows the number of partial products of each weight,
and each subsequent row shows the number of signals remaining at that
weight after each stage of full adders.
log2 weight 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
pps 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Stage1 1 3 2 4 4 4 6 5 5 4 3 3 1
Stage 2 2 1 3 3 3 4 4 4 3 3 2 1

--- Page 407 ---
Stage 3 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 2 1
Stage 4 2 2 2 2 1
At stage 2 in group 12 we have a choice as to whether to pass the two
stage 1 signals through to stage 3, or to use a half adder to pass one signal
through and carry a signal to group 13. By passing the signals through we
are able to use a full adder in stage 3 to reduce three signals to two – one
each in groups 12 and 13. This strategy of avoiding the use of half adders
allows us to accumulate enough signals to use a full adder, which reduces
the total number of signals in the next stage.
Table 12.5 shows how Booth recoding reduces the number of partial
products and hence the number of stages needed to reduce them. Since we
are using Booth recoding to do a signed multiplication, we must sign extend
all partial products to full bit width. We must also account for the carry-in
bits of each input (bits 0, 2, 4, and 6) in our tree. With recoding, a 16-bit
multiplier can be realized with just three stages of adders before the carry-
look-ahead adder, compared with four stages without recoding.
Table 12.5. Wallace-tree accumulation of partial products for an eight-bit by eight-bit signed
radix-4 Booth multiplier
Bits 10–15 each have four inputs because all partial products are sign
extended.
log2 weight 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
pps 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 3 4 2 3 1 2
Stage 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 3 2 3 2 1
Stage 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 1
Stage 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1
In addition to summing the partial products in multipliers, a tree of full-
adder cells can also be applied to summing Nb-bit numbers in
O(log(N)log(b)) time. Figure 12.13, for example, shows how a three-level
tree of full adders can be used to sum six numbers. The VHDL code for this
circuit is shown in Figure 12.14.

--- Page 408 ---
Figure 12.13. Multiple-input adder where every bit is compressed via a series of full adders from the
number of input bits to two. The final two numbers are then summed via a conventional adder.

--- Page 410 ---
Figure 12.14. The VHDL design entity for a six-input signed adder, made up of single-bit full-adder
blocks (fa).
Because each stage of adders reduces the number of signals of a given
weight by 2/3, the number of stages S required to sum N numbers down to
two adder inputs is bounded by
S ≥ ⌈ log3/2(N/2) ⌉ . (12.13)
Unfortunately this bound is not quite tight. It suggests, for example, that ten
inputs can be summed in four stages, while five are required. A tight bound
can be arrived at via the recurrence
S(N) = 0 if 0 ≤ N ≤ 2, (12.14)
S(N) = 1 + S(N − ⌊N/3 ⌋ ) if N ≥ 3. (12.15)
Each stage with N input signals of equal weight uses a = ⌊N/3 ⌋  full adders to
reduce the input to N − a signals until the output is just two signals. We
enumerate the first 16 values of S(N)in Table 12.6.
Table 12.6. Number of stages required to reduce N inputs to two outputs using a Wallace tree of
full adders
N S
1 0
2 0
3 1
4 2
5 3
6 3
7 4
8 4
9 4
10 5

--- Page 411 ---
11 5
12 5
13 5
14 6
15 6
16 6
In this section we have looked at compressing bits of equal weight using
full adders which compress three bits of equal weight to a two-bit binary
number that reflects the number of 1s in the three-bit input. Hence, when
used in this context a full adder is sometimes referred to as a 3–2 compressor
or a 3–2 counter. It is possible to build reduction trees with larger radix
compressors. For example, we can design a 7–3 compressor that accepts
seven bits of equal weight and outputs a three-bit binary number, which is a
count of the 1s in the input. Exercise 12.12 explores building a Wallace tree
with this block. We can also combine two full adders in a way that (modulo
a carry in and carry out) gives us a 4–2 compressor. This concept is explored
in Exercise 12.13.
12.4 SYNTHESIS NOTES
While there are times when one needs to code multipliers and adders
explicitly to achieve particular goals, in most cases modern synthesis tools
do a sufficiently good job and one can simply generate very efficient signed
and unsigned multipliers and adders by just using the VHDL
std_logic_signed operators * and +, respectively. The synthesis tools have
a large library of adder and multiplier designs and will choose the cheapest
design that meets the specified timing constraints.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to design fast arithmetic circuits. We
have covered three techniques used in virtually all high-performance

--- Page 412 ---
arithmetic circuits today: carry look-ahead, Booth recoding, and Wallace
trees.
By computing the carry out of a group of bits with a tree of logic modules,
we can perform an n-bit add in time proportional to log2(n) rather than n. To
build a carry-look-ahead tree, we formulate the add (or other iterative
function) by specifying functions p and g that propagate the carry across a
bit and generate the carry out of a bit – regardless of what the carry was
coming in. We compute the p and g functions for a group of bits recursively
from the p and g functions for smaller groups – and ultimately individual
bits. Once we have computed the carry out of a group of bits, we use an
inverse tree to compute the carry out of each bit in the group.
We can reduce the number of partial products that need to be summed in a
multiplier by a factor of 2 (or more) by Booth recoding one of the inputs to
the multiplier. With radix-4 Booth recoding, for example, we recode an n-bit
input into an (n/2)-digit radix-4 number where each digit takes on integer
values between −2 and 2. The AND used to compute each partial product is
extended with an optional shift (for 2 and −2) and negation (for −2 and−1).
The resulting, much smaller, set of partial product bits are then summed
normally. As an added benefit, Booth recoding handles 2’s complement
numbers with little additional effort.
We can use a tree of adders to sum the partial products of a multiplier
(whether it uses recoding or not). Such Wallace trees reduce the time
required to sum up the partial products to be proportional to log3/2(N/2) for N
partial products.
While it is important to understand these techniques for building fast
arithmetic circuits, modern synthesis tools draw on a library of optimized
arithmetic unit designs that include these techniques – and others. Thus, it is
not necessary to instantiate these methods manually when implementing
standard arithmetic functions. The tools handle these cases well. It is
necessary to implement these methods manually when implementing other
functions, for example, other iterative circuits that can benefit from carry
look-ahead.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
The classic 1961 paper by MacSorley [75] includes all of the techniques
described in this chapter, as well as a few more. It shows how mature the

--- Page 413 ---
field of computer arithmetic was by the early 1960s. Carry look-ahead was
first described in 1956 by Weinberger and Smith [111]. For more
information about fast adders, refer to Harris’s taxonomy of parallel prefix
adders [46] or Ling’s paper on fast addition [70].
Recoding derives from Booth’s algorithm [15], which was originally
developed to perform multiplication sequentially in software. The parallel
form we describe here is similar to that described by MacSorley [75]. The
Wallace tree was first described in ref. [110].
The past three chapters have barely scratched the surface of the interesting
topic of computer arithmetic. The interested reader is referred to one of the
many excellent textbooks and monographs on the subject, including refs.
[25], [42], [43], and [53].
Exercises
12.1Mixed-radix look-ahead. Write the VHDL code for a 32-bit
magnitude comparator using carry look-ahead using PG blocks with
a fan-in of 5 or 6.
12.2Reverse carry propagation. Write the VHDL code for a 32-bit
magnitude comparator formulated by propagating carry from MSB to
LSB and using carry look-ahead with a fan-in of 4. (Hint: look at
Figure 8.42(b).)
12.3Look-ahead arbitration. Write the VHDL code for a 32-bit arbiter
using carry look-ahead with a fan-in of 4.
12.4Look-ahead priority encoder. Combine carry look-ahead with the
technique shown in Figure 8.24 to build a 32-bit priority encoder.
Use a fan-in of 4.
12.5Unsigned recoded multiplier. Redesign the radix-4 Booth recoded
multiplier of Figures 12.9 and 12.10 to handle unsigned numbers.
12.6Radix-8 Booth recoder. Design a radix-8 Booth recorder. Start by
writing out a table like those shown in Tables 12.1 and 12.2. Write
the VHDL for doing a six-bit by six-bit multiply, only generating two
partial products.
12.7Radix-16 Booth recoder. Repeat Exercise 12.6, but instead use a
radix-16 Booth encoding and an eight-bit by eight-bit multiply.
12.8Optimal Booth recoding. For a 64-bit signed multiply determine the
recoding radix that requires the fewest full adders. Include both the

--- Page 414 ---
adders used to pre-compute multiples of a and the adders used to sum
partial products.
12.9Optimal Booth recoding. Repeat Exercise 12.8 for a 128-bit signed
multiply.
12.10Are all the adders needed? The leftmost two adders in each row of
Figure 12.9 have identical input signals. Hence, one might think that
the leftmost adder can be eliminated and its output connected to the
carry out of the penultimate adder in the same row. Is this true? If so,
explain why; if not, explain why not, and suggest an alternative way
to simplify this logic. (Hint: make sure you consider the case where a
= −8 and b = 2, 8, or 12.)
12.11 Wallace tree for 16 × 16-bit radix-4 Booth multiplier. Draw a table
like that of Tables 12.4 and 12.5 for a Wallace tree to sum the partial
products of a 16-bit ×16-bit radix-4 Booth recoded multiplier.
Remember to sign extend your partial products.
12.12Wallace trees with seven-input counter cells. Suppose that, in
addition to a full adder, which takes three inputs of weight i and
produces one output with weight i and one with weight 2i, we also
have a seven-input “double adder” cell which takes seven inputs of
weight i and generates one output each with weights i, 2i, and 4i.
Draw a table like that of Tables 12.4 and 12.5 for a 16-bit ×16-bit
radix-4 Booth recoded multiplier using these seven-input cells (as
well as full and half adders).
12.134–2 compressors. Figure 12.15 shows a 4–2 compressor that takes
four bits of input and produces two bits of output by using two
adders.
(a) Draw a table like that of Tables 12.4 and 12.5 for a 16-bit ×16-bit
radix-8 Booth recoded multiplier using these “four”-input cells. You
may assume that pre-added partial products are available.
(b) What is the bound on the delay of using 4–2 compressors to reduce n
partial products to two? Write your answer in terms of the delay of one
full adder. Is this faster or slower than using a basic 3–2 Wallace tree?
(c) What must the delay of one 4–2 compressor be in order for a 4–2
Wallace tree to have a delay equal to a 3–2 Wallace tree, for the same
number of inputs?

--- Page 415 ---
Figure 12.15. A 4–2 compressor composed of two full adders (a) takes four bits and produces a carry
and sum. As shown in (b), the intermediate carries are passed from one bit position to the next. We use
this structure in Exercise 12.13.
12.14Wallace tree choices. Redo Table 12.5 but using a half adder in stage
1 of group 12 rather than passing both group 12 partial products
through to stage 2.
12.15Wallace tree with two bits per partial product. Draw a table like that
of Tables 12.4 and 12.5 for a Wallace tree to sum the partial products
of a 15-bit radix-8 Booth recoded multiplier. Assume that each partial
product consists of two bits to allow the 3a case to be handled
without doing a pre-add.
12.16Simplified Wallace tree. Two of the full adders in Figure 12.12 can be
replaced by half adders. Redraw the figure with this change, showing
how the now extra input for each of these adders is handled. Is this
design, with three half adders and three full adders, better than the
original design? Explain why it is, or why not.
12.17Fast multiplication, design. Design a 32-bit ×32-bit 2’s complement
multiplier with minimum delay. Your design should include Booth
recoding (with optimal radix) of partial products, a Wallace tree to
reduce the partial products, and a carry-look-ahead adder (with
optimal radix) to perform the final summation. Be careful to handle

--- Page 416 ---
sign extension properly through your summation tree. Show an
analysis of the delay through your design.
12.18Fast multiplication, implementation. Write the VHDL code for the
multiplier of Exercise 12.17 and validate it with a testbench.
12.19Fast unsigned multiplication, design. Design a 32-bit ×32-bit
unsigned multiplier with minimum delay. Your design should include
Booth recoding (with optimal radix) of partial products, a Wallace
tree to reduce the partial products, and a carry-look-ahead adder (with
optimal radix) to perform the final summation. Show an analysis of
the delay through your design.
12.20Fast unsigned multiplication, implementation. Write the VHDL code
for the multiplier of Exercise 12.19 and validate it with a testbench.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 417 ---
13
Arithmetic examples
This chapter demonstrates the design and implementation of several
arithmetic circuits that use the techniques introduced in Chapters 10–12.
First, the design of a fixed-point complex multiplier is shown. We then
introduce an eight-bit floating-point format and develop units that switch
between this format and a fixed-point format. Finally, the chapter
concludes with the implementation of a finite-impulse-response (FIR)
filter.
13.1 COMPLEX MULTIPLICATION
Multiplying two complex numbers a + ib and c + id gives
(a + ib) × (c + id) = (ac − bd) + i(bc + da). (13.1)
To produce the real and imaginary parts of the product requires four
multipliers and two adders.1 Since i2 = −1, the product of the two imaginary
input components must be subtracted from the product of the real input
components to give the real part of the output.
Our complex multiplier uses an s1.14 fixed-point format (see Section
11.2), as is common in signal processing. To avoid triggering an overflow
error or losing precision until after the final summation, we keep
intermediate values at full bit width. Multiplying two s1.14 numbers gives
an s2.28 product, and adding two of these products gives an s3.28 result. The
final stage of our module checks for overflow and rounds the s3.28 result

--- Page 418 ---
back to an s1.14 number. An overflow has occurred when the three most
significant bits of the s3.28 result are not the same value. A leading 1
indicates a negative overflow, while a leading 0 indicates positive overflow.
Our complex multiplier uses saturating arithmetic, clamping the result on an
overflow to minimize the error (see Exercise 10.20).
The block diagram and VHDL for this implementation are shown in
Figures 13.1 and 13.2, respectively.
Figure 13.1. An s1.14 fixed-point complex number multiplier. Composed of two 16-bit multipliers
and two 31-bit adders, this circuit takes two complex inputs a and b and produces complex output x.

--- Page 420 ---
Figure 13.2. VHDL for the complex multiplier.
The design of Figure 13.1 is simple, since neither the multiplier nor the
adders are specialized units, but it is not the fastest. Each of the multipliers
has its own partial product generation and reduction tree, producing one
result via a 31-bit adder (see Section 12.3). To remove the delay of this
adder, we can modify the multipliers to omit this final add stage and instead
output reduced partial products. Two more full-adder blocks can be used to
reduce these four values to the two inputs to the final addition stage. The real
portion of the output requires a subtraction operation, which is performed by
inverting a_img before inputting it to the modified multiplier. We have
supplied the block diagram in Figure 13.3, but leave sizing the intermediate
wires and finalizing the design to the reader in Exercise 13.1.
Figure 13.3. Faster s1.14 fixed-point complex number multiplier. This implementation removes the
final adder in each multiplier and instead reduces the four output values to two via two full adders.
13.2 CONVERTING BETWEEN FIXED- AND
FLOATING-POINT FORMATS
In this section we introduce an eight-bit floating-point format and explore
how to convert between a 12-bit signed number and this new format. The
format that we will use is custom, but resembles that used in A-law and μ-
law audio compression. Like these formats, it compresses a 12-bit signed

--- Page 421 ---
integer to an eight-bit representation. It does not represent fractional
magnitudes.
13.2.1Floating-point format
Our eight-bit format, shown in Figure 13.4, represents values ranging from
−2047 to 2047 with five bits of precision. The format contains a single sign
bit, three bits of exponent, and four bits of mantissa. We augment the four
bits of mantissa with an implied MSB of “1” (see Exercise 11.23) to
represent the five most significant bits of each fixed-point number. In order
to represent numbers less than 16 accurately, we include gradual underflow
(see Section 11.3.2).
Figure 13.4. The floating-point format used throughout this chapter.
Zero is simply represented as 0016, and the value 8016 (negative 0)
represents an arithmetic error code.2 When an overflow occurs when doing
arithmetic, we will set the result to 8016 to indicate an error has occurred.
When the error code is the input to any floating-point function, such as
addition, the output is automatically set to that code.
The value function of our floating-point format is given by
(13.2)
To provide gradual underflow, exponents of 0 and 1 both encode a binary
point just to the right of the LSB of the mantissa. The difference is that an
exponent > 0 implies a 1 left of the MSB of the mantissa while an exponent
of 0 does not. Exponents of 1 to 7 have a bias of 1 – i.e. the mantissa is
shifted left e − 1 positions to give the value.
The equations to compute the floating-point representation, omitting the
potential mantissa round, are as follows:

--- Page 422 ---
s = v < 0; (13.3)
(13.4)
m =|x|2−min(e−1,0). (13.5)
To encode values in floating-point, the mantissa is implicitly the most
significant five bits of the input. The exponent encodes the bit position of the
most significant bit.
The conversion to floating-point also includes a step to round the new
mantissa. We use a simple rounding scheme that rounds up on one-half.
Figures 13.5 and 13.6 show the represented values and relative error,
respectively. The relative error of this representation is never over 3.1%, and
the first value to have any error is 33. Error-free representation occurs only
when the magnitude bits shifted out are all 0. Table 13.1 shows several
example numbers and their floating-point format.

--- Page 423 ---
Figure 13.5. Fixed-point numbers and their floating-point representation. A truncation scheme causes
the floating-point number to be less than or equal to the initial value.

--- Page 424 ---
Figure 13.6. The representation error of our eight-bit floating-point scheme.
Table 13.1. Various fixed-point values and their floating-point representations
The third column represents the conversion of the floating-point value back
to 12-bit fixed-point.
Fixed-point (hex) Floating-point (hex) Converted float (hex)
000 00 000
003 03 003
00f 0f 00f
011 11 011
0de 4c 0e0
59d 76 580
7ff 7f 7C0

--- Page 425 ---
fff 81 fff
13.2.2Fixed- to floating-point conversion
Figure 13.7 shows a block diagram of a 12-bit fixed-point to an eight-bit
floating-point converter. The input is first converted from 2’s complement to
sign magnitude using a negation block and a multiplexer. Next, a find-first-
one unit finds the most significant 1 (see Section 8.5).
Figure 13.7. Block diagram for converting fixed-point to floating-point numbers.
This one-hot signal is immediately input into a priority encoder to encode
the three-bit exponent and the mantissa shift amount. The logic shifts the
least significant ten bits of the input into the mantissa. Rounding a number
can result in needing to increment the exponent (and potentially causing
overflow).
The VHDL code for the fixed- to floating-point converter can be found in
Figure 13.8.

--- Page 427 ---
Figure 13.8. The top-level VHDL design entity for fixed- to floating-point conversion.
When shifting, the design entity saves a round bit (mant_lng(0)) and adds
it back to the mantissa. If the mantissa had been 4b"1111" before the round
operation, it will overflow and we add 1 to the exponent. If the exponent
overflows, we saturate the output value. In the design entity provided, the
input of 80016 (−2048) does not convert to ff16, but rather to our error code
of 0 × 80. Exercise 13.4 will ask you to fix this flaw.
13.2.3Floating- to fixed-point conversion
A floating- to fixed-point converter block diagram and VHDL are shown in
Figures 13.9 and 13.10. The first step in the conversion process is to
determine whether the implicit 1 is present by checking whether the
exponent is equal to 0. If the 1 is present, we subtract 1 from the exponent
and then shift the mantissa and implicit bit to the left by the prescribed
amount. Finally, the negative value of the magnitude is taken, if necessary.
Figure 13.9. Block diagram of a floating- to fixed-point converter.

--- Page 428 ---
Figure 13.10. VHDL design entity for floating-point to fixed-point conversion.
13.3 FIR FILTER
This section details the design of a four-tap finite-impulse-response (FIR)
filter. Given a set of four input values and weights, the output of the module
is given by
y = w0x0 + w1x1 + w2x2 + w3x3. (13.6)

--- Page 429 ---
That is, the filter performs a dot product of the four-element vectors w and x.
The input and output values are in the floating-point format of Section 13.2.
The weights are in 1.4 fixed-point format. For the implementation shown,
we restrict the weights to be positive and sum to no more than 1:
(13.7)
We ask the reader to remove these restrictions in Exercises 13.7 and 13.8.
Since our floating-point scheme represents only a 12-bit dynamic range
(s11.0), we opt to do all arithmetic in fixed-point. These fixed-point units
will be smaller and faster than the floating-point counterparts. The weight
values are input as unsigned 1.4 values (16ths). To avoid losing intermediate
precision, the output of the s11.0 × 1.4 multiplier is kept in s11.4 fixed-point.
Because of the restriction that the sum of the weights is less than 1, the adder
outputs an s11.4 value. The last stage of the FIR filter rounds the remaining
fractional portion and converts back to eight-bit floating-point format. The
block diagram and numerical representations are shown in Figure 13.11.
Figure 13.11. FIR filter block diagram. All weights must be positive and sum to no more than 1. The
filter converts the eight-bit floating-point inputs into a 12-bit fixed-point format. All intermediate
values are all fixed-point and sized so as to not lose precision.

--- Page 430 ---
The FIR VHDL is shown in Figure 13.12. Each floating-point input is first
converted to fixed-point using the conversion block of Figure 13.10. Next,
we sign extend the fixed-point values (fixi) and multiply by the weights
(giving weightedi). The sum of the weighted numbers is rounded and
converted back to floating-point. The last step of the process is to output an
error code if an error code was input.


--- Page 431 ---
Figure 13.12. VHDL design entity for the floating-point FIR filter.
Summary
In this chapter you have seen three extended examples that bring together
much of what you have learned from Chapters 10–12. Our complex
multiplier illustrates the issues of overflow and precision that come when
working with fixed-point numbers and how rounding and saturation are used
to deal with these issues.
Our discussion of fixed- to floating-point conversion, which is based
loosely on popular audio compression standards, shows the advantage of
floating-point representation for relative precision and illustrates many
details of floating-point representation. The representation includes an
implied 1 and gradual underflow. Careful rounding and normalization are
required during the conversion.
Our final example is a finite-impulse-response filter. This module
illustrates the use of multiple number systems. It has floating-point inputs
and outputs, fixed-point weights, and performs its internal calculations in
fixed-point. (It uses our fixed- to floating-point conversion design entities to
convert back and forth.) Careful attention is given to the range and precision
of internal representations to avoid overflow or loss of precision.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Our version of μ-law comes from the G.711 standard [59].
Exercises
13.1Faster complex multiplication, design. Give a detailed design
(including wire widths and Wallace tree) of the complex multiplier
found in Figure 13.3. You do not need to write the VHDL, but should
rather describe the module in such a way that doing so would be
simple.
13.2Faster complex multiplication, implementation. Write and verify the
VHDL to implement your design from Exercise 13.1.
13.3More complex multiplication. Design, write, and verify the VHDL
for a module that multiplies eight different s1.14 complex numbers

--- Page 432 ---
by each other. You should not lose precision before the final output
step.
13.4Fixed- to floating-point conversion. The fixed-point conversion of
Figure 13.8 does not work properly given an input value of 80016; fix
this.
13.5Fixed- to floating-point conversion, truncation. Modify the fixed-
point to floating-point converter of Figure 13.8 to use a truncation
scheme (drop the bits that get shifted out), instead of rounding. What
is the maximum representation error in this format? Plot the error
over all input numbers.
13.63E5 floating-point. Write both a fixed- to floating-point and a
floating- to fixed-point converter that can convert between a 32-bit
signed integer and a 3E5 floating-point value. This format will have a
sign bit, five bits of exponent (maximum value 29), an implicit 1, and
two explicit mantissa bits. Use an implicit 1, gradual underflow, and
truncation. This representation allows for a 4× data compression by
representing only the three MSBs of the input value. What is the
maximum representation error?
13.7Extending the FIR filter, I. Modify the FIR filter of Figure 13.12 to
accept weights in s2.5 format, subject only to the following
constraint:
13.8Extending the FIR filter, II. Modify the FIR filter of Exercise 13.7
and remove the constraint on the sum of the weights. Be sure to
check for overflow.
13.9Extending the FIR filter, III. Using, without modification, the FIR
filter block of Figure 13.12, design a 16-tap FIR function that finds
the average of all 16 inputs. Take care to minimize precision loss.
What parts of the filter need to be modified to eliminate precision
loss completely?
13.10Putting it all together. Draw the block diagram for a complex four-
tap FIR filter. The value inputs and final outputs will be 3E5 complex
numbers. The weights will be s1.4 fixed-point complex numbers. Be
sure to denote the number formatting and bit widths of all

--- Page 433 ---
intermediate wires. No precision loss should occur until the final
output stage.
13.11 Cross products. The cross product of a vector (ax, ay, az) with another
vector (bx, by, bz) results in a third vector (cx, cy, cz), where
cx = aybz − azby,
cy = azbx − axbz,
cz = axby − aybx.
Design a module with inputs of two 3-vectors of s3.14 numbers that
outputs a 3-vector. Your output vector will not be composed of s3.14
numbers, but rather the minimum bit-width number with no precision
loss.
13.12Approximate square root. An approximation3 for finding the square
root of numbers between 0.5 and 2 is found on computing the value
Design and write a VHDL design entity that computes the approximate
square root of a 1.8 number using the above formula. You may assume
that the input is between 0.5 and 2. You should output a 1.8 number,
but not suffer any intermediate precision loss. What is the worst-case
error for all numbers between 0.5 and 2?
13.13Approximate division. An approximation4 for finding the reciprocal
of a number between 0.5 and 1 is given by
(a) Plot the error of this approximation from x = 0.5 to x = 1.
(b) Design a floating-point divider module (23E8 format) that multiplies
the dividend by the reciprocal of the divisor. You should provide a
block diagram at least as detailed as that of Figure 11.1.5
13.14BCD to binary. Design and code a VHDL design entity to convert a
four-digit unsigned BCD whole number into a 14-bit binary number.

--- Page 434 ---
13.15Binary to BCD. Design and code a VHDL design entity to convert a
14-bit unsigned binary number into a four-digit BCD value.
1 It is also possible to build this circuit with three multipliers (ad, bc, (a − b)(c + d)), but we focus on
the implementation with four products.
2 Similar to NaN in the IEEE floating-point standard.
3 Found by computing the Taylor series of √x about x = 1.
4 Found by computing the Taylor series of 1/x about x = 1.
5 Beware that few systems can tolerate having any error on a division operation.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 435 ---
Part IV
Synchronous sequential logic
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 436 ---
14
Sequential logic
The output of sequential logic depends not only on its input, but also on
its state, which may reflect the history of the input. We form a sequential
logic circuit via feedback – feeding state variables computed by a block of
combinational logic back to its input. General sequential logic, with
asynchronous feedback, can become complex to design and analyze due
to multiple state bits changing at different times. We simplify our design
and analysis tasks in this chapter by restricting ourselves to synchronous
sequential logic, in which the state variables are held in a register and
updated on each rising edge of a clock signal (clk).1
The behavior of a synchronous sequential logic circuit, or finite-state
machine (FSM), is completely described by two logic functions: one that
computes its next state as a function of its input and present state, and one
that computes its output – also as a function of its input and present state.
We describe these two functions by means of a state table, or graphically
with a state diagram. If states are specified symbolically, a state
assignment maps the symbolic states onto a set of bit vectors – both
binary and one-hot state assignments are commonly used.
Given a state table (or state diagram) and a state assignment, the task of
implementing a finite-state machine is a simple one of synthesizing the
next-state and output logic functions. For a one-hot state encoding, the
synthesis is particularly simple because each state maps to a separate flip-
flop and all edges in the state diagram leading to a state map into a logic
function on the input of that flip-flop. For binary encodings, Karnaugh
maps for each bit of the state vector are written and reduced to logic
equations.
Finite-state machines can be implemented in VHDL by creating a state
register to hold the current state, and describing the next-state and output

--- Page 437 ---
functions with combinational logic descriptions, such as case statements
as described in Chapter 7. State assignments should be specified using
constants to allow them to be changed without altering the machine
description itself. Special attention should be given to resetting the FSM
to a known state at startup.
14.1 SEQUENTIAL CIRCUITS
Recall that a combinational circuit produces an output that depends only on
the current state of its input. Recall also that combinational circuits must be
acyclic. If we add feedback to a combinational circuit, creating a cycle as
shown in Figure 14.1, the circuit becomes sequential. The output of a
sequential circuit depends not only on its current input, but also on the
history of previous inputs. The cycle created by the feedback allows the
circuit to store information about its previous input. We refer to the
information stored on the feedback signals as the state of the circuit.
Figure 14.1. Sequential circuits are formed when feedback paths carrying state information are added
to combinational circuits. The output of a sequential circuit depends both on the current input and on
the state, which is a function of previous inputs.
A sequential circuit generates an output that is a function both of its input
and of its present state. It also generates its next state, also as a function of
its input and its present state.
Figure 14.2 shows a reset–set (RS) flip-flop, a very simple sequential
logic circuit that is composed of two NOR gates.2 The output q is fed back to
the input as a state variable. The circuit’s behavior is described by the
equation q = r ∧  (s ∨  q). The state variable q appears on both sides of the
equation. To make the dynamics clearer, we rewrite this as qnew =

--- Page 438 ---
r∧ (s∨qold). That is, the equation tells us how to derive the new state of q as a
function of the inputs and the old state of q.
Figure 14.2. An RS flip-flop is a simple example of a sequential circuit: (a) schematic; (b) alternative
schematic that does not obey the bubble rule.
From the equation (and the schematic), it is easy to see that if r = 1, q = 0
and the flip-flop is reset; if s = 1 and r = 0, q = 1 and the flip-flop is set; and
if s = 0 and r = 0, the output q stays in whatever state it was in. The output q
reflects the last input to be high. If r was high last, q = 0. If s washighlast,q =
1. We summarize this behavior in the state table of Table 14.1.
Table 14.1. State table for RS flip-flop
r s qold qnew
0 0 0 0
0 0 1 1
0 1 X 1
1 X X 0
Because the function of sequential circuits depends on the evolution of
signals over time, we often describe their behavior using a timing diagram.
A timing diagram illustrating operation of the RS flip-flop is shown in
Figure 14.3. The figure shows the waveforms, signal levels as a function of
time, for the signals r, s, and q. Time advances from left to right. Arrows
from one signal to another show cause and effect.


--- Page 439 ---
Figure 14.3. Timing diagram showing operation of the RS flip-flop. The value of signals is shown as
time advances from left to right.
Initially, q is in an unknown state; it could be either high or low, denoted
by both high and low lines. At time t1, r goes high, causing q to fall –
resetting the flip-flop. Signal s goes high at t2 causing q to rise – setting the
flip-flop. The flip-flop is reset again at t3. Signal s goes high at t4, but this
has no effect on the output, since r is also high. Signal s going high with r
low at t5 does set the flip-flop. It is reset again at t6 when r goes high – even
though s is still high. The flip-flop is set for a final time at t7 when r goes
low.
14.2 SYNCHRONOUS SEQUENTIAL
CIRCUITS
While the RS flip-flop of Figure 14.2 is simple enough to understand,
arbitrary sequential circuits, with many bits of state feedback, can give
complex behavior. Part of the complexity is due to the fact that the different
bits of the next-state signal may change at different times. Such races can
lead to a next-state output that depends on circuit delay. We defer discussion
of general asynchronous sequential circuits until Chapter 26. Until then, we
restrict our attention to synchronous sequential circuits in which clocked
storage elements are used to ensure that all state variables change state at the
same time, synchronized to a clock signal. Synchronous sequential circuits
are sometimes called finite-state machines, or FSMs.
A block diagram of a synchronous sequential logic circuit is shown in
Figure 14.4. The circuit is synchronous because the state feedback loop is
broken by an s-bit wide D flip-flop (where s is the number of state bits). This
flip-flop circuit, described in Section 15.2, updates its output with the value
of its input on the rising edge of the clock signal. At all other times, the
output remains stable. Inserting the D flip-flop into the feedback loop
constrains all of the state bits to change at the same time – eliminating the
possibility of races.

--- Page 440 ---
Figure 14.4. A synchronous sequential circuit breaks the state feedback loop with a clocked storage
element (in this case a D-type flip-flop). The flip-flop ensures that all state variables change value at
the same time – when the clock signal rises.
Operation of a synchronous sequential circuit is illustrated in the timing
diagram of Figure 14.5. During each clock cycle, the time from one rising
edge of the clock to the next, a block of combinational logic computes the
next state and output (not shown) as a combinational function of the input
and current state. At each rising edge of the clock, the current state (state) is
updated with the next state computed during the previous clock cycle.
Figure 14.5. Timing diagram showing operation of a synchronous sequential circuit. The state
advances on each rising edge of the clock signal, clk.
During the first clock cycle of Figure 14.5, for example, the current state
is SB, and the input changes to B before the end of the cycle. The
combinational logic then computes the next state SC = f(B, SB). At the end
of the cycle the clock rises again, updating the current state to be SC. The
state will be SC until the clock rises again.
We can analyze synchronous sequential circuits on a clock-by-clock basis.
The next state and output during a given clock cycle depend only on the
current state and input during that clock cycle. At each clock, the current
state advances to the next state.
For example, suppose our next state and output logic are as given by Table
14.2. If our circuit starts in state 00 and has an input sequence of 011011011
for the first nine cycles, what will its state and output be each cycle?

--- Page 441 ---
Table 14.2. State table for example synchronous logic circuit
Next state Out
State in = 0 in = 1 in = 0 in = 1
00 00 01 0 0
01 00 11 0 0
11 01 10 0 0
10 11 00 0 1
Operation of our example circuit is shown in Table 14.3. In cycle 0 we
start in state 00. The input and output are both 0 this cycle. With an input of
0 in state 00, the next state is also 00, so in cycle 1 we remain in state 00, but
now with an input of 1. A state of 00 and an input of 1 gives us a next state
of 01 for cycle 2. With the input high in state 01, we get a next state of 11 for
cycle 3. The input goes low in state 11 in cycle 3, taking us back to state 01
for cycle 4. The input is high for the next two cycles, taking us to 11 and 10
in cycles 5 and 6, respectively. A low input in cycle 6 takes us back to 11 for
cycle 7. High inputs for cycles 7 and 8 take us to states 10 and 00 for cycles
8 and 9. The output goes high in cycle 8 since the state is 10 and the input is
1.
Table 14.3. State sequence for the sequential logic circuit described by Table 14.2 on the input
sequence 011011011
Cycle State In Out
0 00 0 0
1 00 1 0
2 01 1 0
3 11 0 0
4 01 1 0
5 11 1 0
6 10 0 0
7 11 1 0
8 10 1 1
9 00 0

--- Page 442 ---
One representation of a finite-state machine is a state table, such as Table
14.2, that gives the next-state and output functions in tabular form. An
equivalent graphical representation is a state diagram, as shown in Figure
14.6.
Figure 14.6. State diagram for finite-state machine of Table 14.2. The circles represent the four states.
Each arrow represents a state transition from a current state to a next state and is labeled input/output
– the input that causes the transition, and the output in the current state for that input.
Each circle in Figure 14.6 represents one state. It is labeled with the name
of the state. Here we use the value of the state variables as the state name.
Later we will introduce symbolic state names, independent of the state
coding. The next-state function is shown by the arrows. Each arrow
represents a state transition and is labeled with the input and output values
during that transition. For example, the arrow from state 00 to state 01,
labeled 1/0, implies that in state 00 when the input is 1 the next state is 01
and the output is 0. Note that an arrow may go from a state to itself, as in the
case of the input 0 transition from state 00 to state 00. Also, a transition may
go quite a distance in the diagram, as with the input 1 transition from state
10 to state 00.
14.3 TRAFFIC-LIGHT CONTROLLER
As a second example of an FSM, consider the problem of controlling the
traffic lights at an intersection of a north–south road with an east–west road,
as shown in Figure 14.7. There are six lights to control: green, yellow, and
red both for the north–south road and for the east– west road. Our FSM will
take as input signal carew that indicates that a car is waiting on the east–west
road. A second input, rst, resets the FSM to a known state.

--- Page 443 ---
Figure 14.7. Controlling traffic lights at a road intersection with an FSM. Our FSM has two inputs; a
reset (rst) and a signal that indicates that a car is waiting on the east–west road (carew). The FSM has
six outputs that control the three north–south lights (green, yellow, red) and the three east–west lights.
We start with an English-language description of our FSM.
(1) Reset to a state where the light is green in the north–south direction and
red in the east–west direction.
(2) When a car is detected in the east–west direction (carew = 1), go
through a sequence that makes the light go green in the east–west
direction and then return to green in the north–south direction.
(3) A direction with a green light must first transition to a state where the
light is yellow before going to a state where the light goes red.
(4) A direction can have a green light only if the light in the other direction
is red.
A state diagram for an FSM that meets our specification is shown in
Figure 14.8. Compared with the state diagram of Figure 14.6, there are two
major differences. First, the states are labeled with symbolic names. Second,
the output values are placed under the states rather than on the transitions.
This is because the output is a function only of the state, not of the input.3

--- Page 444 ---
Figure 14.8. State diagram for a traffic-light controller FSM. The states are labeled with symbolic
names. The outputs are given under each state (green–yellow–red (three-bits) for north–south followed
by green–yellow–red for east–west). The reset arrows are omitted. The FSM resets to state GNS.
The FSM resets to state GNS (for green–north–south). In this state the
output is 100 001. The first 100 represents the north–south lights (green–
yellow–red). The 001 represents the east–west lights (also green–yellow–
red). Hence the light is green in the north–south direction and red in the
east–west direction. Resetting to this state satisfies specification number 1.
The arrow labeled carew keeps us in state GNS until a car is detected in the
east–west direction.
When a car is detected in the east–west direction, the signal carew
becomes true, and the next rising edge of the clock causes the machine to
enter state YNS (yellow–north–south). In this state the output is 010 001.
The 010 implies yellow in the north–south direction, and 001 implies red in
the east–west direction. Transitioning to this state before making east–west
green satisfies specification 3 on the transition from GNS to GEW. The
arrow out of state YNS has no label. This implies that this state transition
always occurs (unless the FSM is reset).
State YNS is always followed by state GEW (green, east–west). In this
state the output is 001 100 – red in the north–south direction and green in the
east–west direction. This state, and the sequence it is part of, satisfies
specification 2. State GEW is always followed by state YEW. State YEW
(yellow, east–west) has output 001 010 – red in the north–south direction
and yellow in the east–west direction. This state satisfies specification 3 on
the transition between GEW and GNS.

--- Page 445 ---
A state table for the traffic-light controller is shown in Table 14.4. Reset is
not shown. We explore some variations of this basic traffic-light controller in
Exercises 14.3 to 14.9.
Table 14.4. State table for the traffic-light controller FSM; the FSM resets to state GNS
Next state
State carew = 0 carew = 1 Out
GNS GNS YNS 100 001
YNS GEW GEW 010 001
GEW YEW YEW 001 100
YEW GNS GNS 001 010
EXAMPLE 14.1 State machine
Draw a state diagram for a state machine that fills missing pulses in a pulse
train. The input a is a signal that normally goes high for one cycle every five
cycles. When input a goes high in the expected cycle, or one cycle early, the
output q should go high for the following cycle. If the input a is one cycle
early or late, timing is reset so a is expected to go high again five cycles
later. If a goes high two cycles early or late, it is ignored. If a fails to appear
in the expected cycles, the output q goes high anyway in the cycle after a
was expected to appear.
The state diagram, shown in Figure 14.9, has eight states. The output for
each state is shown under the state name. On reset, the machine starts in state
R, awaiting the first pulse on a. When this pulse arrives, the machine moves
to state 1 and outputs a 1. The machine advances to states 2, 3, and 4,
ignoring any inputs on a that arrive in states 1, 2, or 3. If a is high in state 4
(one cycle early), the machine goes to state 1 – resetting the timing. A pulse
arriving at the expected time, in state 5, causes a transition to state 1 –
restarting the sequence. If a is zero in state 5, control transfers to state M,
where the output goes high to handle a missing or late pulse. If a
goeshighinstateM, control transfers to state L to reset timing for the late
pulse. Otherwise, control transfers to state 2 to handle a missing pulse
without resetting timing.

--- Page 446 ---
Figure 14.9. State diagram for the pulse-filler FSM, as described in Example 14.1.
14.4 STATE ASSIGNMENT
When an FSM is specified with symbolic state names as in Figure 14.8 or
Table 14.4, we need to assign actual binary values to the states before we can
implement the FSM. This process of assigning values to states is called state
assignment.
With a synchronous machine, we can assign the states to any set of values,
as long as the value for each state is unique.4 It takes at least smin = log2(N)
bits to represent N states; however, the best state assignment is not always
the one with the fewest bits. We refer to each bit of a state vector as a state
variable.
A one-hot state assignment uses N bits to represent N states. Each state
gets its own bit. When the machine is in the ith state, the corresponding bit bi
of the state variable is 1. In all other states, bi is 0. A one-hot state
assignment for the traffic-light controller FSM is shown in Table 14.5. It
takes four bits to represent the four states. In any state, only one bit is set. A
one-hot assignment makes the logic design of a finite-state machine
particularly simple, as we shall see below.
Table 14.5. One-hot state assignment for the traffic-light controller FSM
State Encoding
GNS 0001

--- Page 447 ---
YNS 0010
GEW 0100
YEW 1000
A binary state assignment uses the minimum number of bits, smin =
log2(N), to represent N states. Of the N! possible binary state assignments
(24 for four states), it does not really matter which one you choose. While
many academic papers have been written about choosing state assignments
to minimize implementation logic, in practice it does not really matter.
Except in very rare cases, the number of gates saved by optimizing the state
assignment is unimportant. Don’t waste much time on state assignment.
Design time is more important than a few gates.
One possible binary state assignment for the traffic-light controller FSM is
shown in Table 14.6. This particular state assignment uses a Gray code so
that only one bit of state changes on each state transition. This sometimes
reduces power and minimizes logic. We could just as easily have chosen a
straight binary count (GEW = 10, YEW = 11), and it wouldn’t make much
difference.
Table 14.6. Binary state assignment for the traffic-light controller FSM
State Encoding
GNS 00
YNS 01
GEW 11
YEW 10
14.5 IMPLEMENTATION OF FINITE-STATE
MACHINES
Given a state table (or state diagram) and a state assignment, the
implementation of an FSM is reduced to the problem of designing two
combinational logic circuits, one for the next state and one for the output.
These combinational logic circuits are combined with an s-bit wide D flip-

--- Page 448 ---
flop to update the current state from the next state on each rising edge of the
clock. A multi-bit D flip-flop like this is often called a register, and when it
is used to hold the state of an FSM it is called the state register.
With a one-hot state assignment, the implementation of the next-state
logic is a direct translation of the state diagram, as shown in Figure 14.10 for
our traffic-light controller FSM. Four flip-flops correspond to the four states:
GNS, YNS, GEW, and YEW. When the first flip-flop is set, the FSM is in
state GNS. The logic feeding the D input of each flip-flop is an OR of the
transition arrows feeding the corresponding state in the state diagram. For
states GEW and YEW this is just a wire. These states always follow the
preceding state. For state YNS, the input logic is an AND gate that ANDs the
previous state (GNS) with the condition for a transition from GNS to YNS
(carew). State GNS is the target of two destination arrows and hence
requires an OR gate to combine them. Its input logic is the OR of a wire
from state YEW, and an AND gate combining state GNS and condition
carew – this corresponds to the back edge from state GNS to itself.
Figure 14.10. Implementation of the traffic-light controller FSM using a one-hot state encoding. Four
flip-flops are used, one corresponding to each state. The state transition arrows into a state directly
translate into the logic preceding the corresponding flip-flop. The outputs, shown at the top, represent
the state of each individual light. For example, lrns is the red light in the north–south direction.
It is always possible to implement directly a one-hot FSM in this manner.
This made design and maintenance of FSMs very easy in the era before logic
synthesis. One would simply instantiate a flip-flop for each state, and
appropriate input gates for each transition arrow. The function is
immediately apparent from the logic. Adding, deleting, or changing the
condition on a transition arrow was straightforward, and affected only the

--- Page 449 ---
part of the logic associated with the transition arrow. With modern logic
synthesis, the advantage of this approach is greatly diminished.
The output logic for the circuit of Figure 14.10 consists of two NOR
gates. States GNS, YNS, GEW, and YEW drive the green and yellow light
outputs directly. The red light outputs are generated by observing that for
each direction, if the yellow and green lights are off, the red light should be
on: r = y ∧  g.
To implement our FSM with a binary state encoding, we proceed with
logic synthesis of each of the state variables. First, we convert our state table
into a truth table – showing each next-state variable as a function of the
current state variable and all inputs. For example, a truth table for the traffic-
light controller FSM with the state encoding of Table 14.6 is shown in Table
14.7.
Table 14.7. Truth table for the next-state function of the traffic-light controller FSM with the
state assignment of Table 14.6
State carew Next state (ns1, ns0) Comment
00 0 00 green north/south carew = 0
00 1 01 green north/south carew = 1
01 0 11 yellow north/south carew = 0
01 1 11 yellow north/south carew = 1
11 0 10 green east/west carew = 0
11 1 10 green east/west carew = 1
10 0 00 yellow east/west carew = 0
10 1 00 yellow east/west carew = 1
From this state table we draw the two Karnaugh maps shown in Figure
14.11. The left K-map shows the truth table for the MSB of the next state
(ns1), and the right K-map shows the truth table for the LSB of the next stage
(ns0). The next-state logic here is very simple. The ns1 function has a single
prime implicant, and the ns0 function has two. All three are essential. The
logic here is very simple:
ns1 = s0, (14.1)

--- Page 450 ---
ns0 = (s0 ∨  carew) ∧  s1, (14.2)
where ns1, ns0 are the next-state variables and s1, s0 are the current-state
variables.
Figure 14.11. Karnaugh maps for computing the next state (ns1 ns0) based on the current state and
input carew.
Now that we have the next-state function, what remains is to derive the
output function. To do this we write down the truth table for the outputs – a
function of only the current state. This is shown in Table 14.8. The logic
functions for the output variables can be derived directly from this table as
follows:
Table 14.8. Truth table for the output function of the traffic-light controller FSM with the state
assignment of Table 14.6
State Output
00 100 001
01 010 001
11 001 100
10 001 010
gns = s1 ∧  s0, (14.3)
yns = s1 ∧  s0, (14.4)

--- Page 451 ---
rns = s1, (14.5)
gew = s1 ∧  s0, (14.6)
yew = s1 ∧  s0, (14.7)
rew = s1. (14.8)
By combining the next-state and logic equations, we obtain the logic
diagram of Figure 14.12.
Figure 14.12. Logic diagram for traffic-light controller FSM implemented with the state assignment
of Table 14.6.
14.6 VHDL IMPLEMENTATION OF FINITE-
STATE MACHINES
With VHDL, designing an FSM is a simple matter of specifying the next-
state and output functions and selecting a state assignment. Logic synthesis
does all the work of generating the next-state and output logic. A VHDL
description of the traffic-light controller FSM is shown in Figure 14.13. The
bulk of the logic is in a single case statement that defines both the next-state
and output functions. The syntax std_logic_vector’(X) used inside the
case statement is a VHDL qualified expression. A qualified expression has

--- Page 452 ---
the syntax <type_mark>’(<expression>) and is used when the type of
<expression> is ambiguous. In this case we need to make it clear that the
array aggregate has type std_logic_vector for the assignment to next1 in
the last case alternative to be legal because the array aggregate could also be
of type string (which is an array of characters).

--- Page 454 ---
Figure 14.13. VHDL description of traffic-light controller FSM.
There are three key points to be made about this code.
(1) In implementing all sequential logic, all state variables should be
explicitly declared as D flip-flops. Do not let the VHDL compiler infer
flip-flops for you. In this code, the state flip-flops are explicitly
instantiated in the following code:
-- instantiate state register STATE_REG: vDFF generic
map(SWIDTH) port map(clk,next_state,current_state);
This code instantiates an SWIDTH-wide D flip-flop that is clocked by
clk, has input next_state, and outputs current_state. The
component vDFF is defined in the package ff in Figure 14.16 which
will be described below.
(2) In designing finite-state machines, use VHDL constant declarations to
define all constants. Do not hard-code any constants in the code.
Constants that should be declared in this way include the width of the
state vector SWIDTH, the state encodings (e.g., GNS), and input and output
encodings (e.g., GNSL). In particular, defining symbolic names for the
state encodings enables you to change a state assignment by changing
the definitions. We will see an example of this in the following.
(3) Make sure you reset your FSM. Here we declare two next-state vectors,
next1 and next. The case statement computes next1 as the next state,
ignoring reset rst. A final assign statement overrides this next state
with the reset state GNS if rst is asserted:
-- add reset
next_state <= GNS when rst else next1;
Factoring the reset out of the next state function in this manner greatly
improves the readability of the code. If we did not do this, we’d have to
repeat the reset logic in every state, rather than doing it just once.
The VHDL constant definitions for the traffic-light controller FSM are
shown in Figure 14.14. Using the keyword constant in this manner enables
us to introduce symbolic names in our code, improving readability, and also
makes it easy to change encodings. For example, substituting the one-hot

--- Page 455 ---
state encodings of Figure 14.15 changes our FSM from a binary to a one-hot
state assignment without changing any other lines of code.
Figure 14.14. VHDL definitions for traffic-light controller state variables and output encodings.
Figure 14.15. VHDL definitions for a one-hot state assignment for the traffic-light controller FSM.
The VHDL code for the vDFF component is shown in Figure 14.16 along
with a declaration for the package ff. The edge-sensitive behavior of the
flip-flop is described by the process statement:

--- Page 457 ---
Figure 14.16. VHDL description of a D flip-flop.
This statement performs the update of the output Q <= D on every rising
edge of clk. This is indicated by the condition “rising_edge(X)” which is
true whenever signal X has a rising edge. Most synthesis tools allow more
complex expressions than “Q <= D” inside the “if rising\_edge(clk)
then” statement to be synthesized into gates. However, such code can be
more difficult to understand.
Our testbench for the traffic-light controller is shown in Figure 14.17. To
test an FSM thoroughly, we would like to visit every state and traverse every
edge of the state diagram. Achieving this coverage is not particularly
difficult for our traffic-light controller FSM.

--- Page 458 ---
Figure 14.17. VHDL testbench for the traffic-light controller FSM.
The testbench has three parts. First, it instantiates a Traffic_Light design
entity – the unit being tested. The second part is a process that performs
clock generation and output. The code displays some variables and generates

--- Page 459 ---
a clock with a 10 nanosecond period. The output is done in the middle of the
clock cycle – just after clk goes low.
Notice that to print out the value of current_state inside of
Traffic_Light the second part of the testbench used the syntax “<<signal
DUT.current_state: state_type>>”. This is an example of a VHDL 2008
external name. It enables us to read the value of a signal deep inside our
design under test without having to add signals to the top level interface. An
external name begins with the compound delimiter “<<” followed by the
type of object accessed, which can be signal, variable,orconstant,
followed by an external path name, followed by a colon (:), followed by the
subtype of the object, followed by the compound delimiter “>>”. In this case
DUT.current_state is the external path name for the signal we would like to
print out. The external path name is composed of the instance labels of the
instantiated component, in this case, DUT, and the internal signal name, each
separated by a period symbol (.).
The final part is process containing a test script that generates the inputs
for the module being tested. We use the VHDL-2008 std.env.stop()
function defined in the package std.env. The function stop() causes
simulation to stop. If we did not call this function our simulation would not
terminate since the first process, generating the clock, never reaches an
unconditional wait statement (i.e., “wait;”).
The inputs and the response of the device under test (the component
labeled “DUT”) are shown in textual form in Figure 14.18, which shows the
signals on each falling edge of the clock, and as waveforms in Figure 14.19.
Initially, state and next are both in an unknown state (x in the text output,
and a line midway between a 1 and 0 in the waveform). Signal rst is
asserted in the second clock cycle to reset to a known state. Next-state signal
next responds immediately, and state follows on the rising edge of the
clock. The FSM stays in state 00 until carew rises on clock 5, causing the
FSM to go to state 01 on clock 6. This starts a sequence through states 01,
11, 10, and back to 00 on clock 9. It stays in state 00 for two cycles this time,
until carew going high in clock 10 causes the FSM to start the sequence
again in clock 11. This time carew stays high, and the sequence repeats until
the simulation ends.

--- Page 460 ---
Figure 14.18. Results of simulating the traffic-light controller FSM of Figure 14.13 using the
testbench of Figure 14.17. Each line shows the values of rst, carew, state, and lights on a falling
edge of the clock.

--- Page 462 ---
Figure 14.19. Waveforms from simulation of the traffic-light controller of Figure 14.13 using the
testbench of Figure 14.17.
EXAMPLE 14.2 VHDL FSM
Write a VHDL design entity for the pulse-filler FSM of Example 14.1.
The code is shown in Figure 14.20. In this example we declare constants
for the state machine inside the architecture body instead of placing them in
a separate package. We declare two internal signals, one for the current state,
called state, and one for the next state, called nxt. We instantiate a register
to hold the state. A process and a matching case statement are used to
encode the state table as combinational logic.

--- Page 464 ---
Figure 14.20. VHDL implementing the pulse-filler FSM of Example 14.2.
Summary
In this chapter you have added the dimension of time to your study of digital
systems. By adding feedback to combinational logic circuits, we create
sequential logic circuits: circuits whose outputs are a function not only of
their inputs, but also of their present state and thus indirectly of their history.
While combinational logic circuits are static, always producing the same
output given the same input, the behavior of sequential logic circuits unfolds
over time.
To tame potential races between state variables, synchronous sequential
logic circuits include a clocked flip-flop or register in all feedback paths.
This causes all state variables to be updated simultaneously on the rising
edge of a clock signal. The state of a synchronous sequential logic circuit
evolves in discrete steps. Each clock cycle, the state is updated to a value
computed from the previous state and the inputs on the rising clock edge.
This step-by-step behavior of synchronous sequential logic circuits makes
them easy to analyze and design.
We design a synchronous sequential circuit, or finite-state machine, by
starting with a state diagram or state table that describes the function of the
machine. A state assignment assigns a unique bit pattern to each state of our
machine. From the assignment and the diagram or table we can write down
the combinational logic functions for the next state and output using the
methods described earlier in this book.
We can implement finite-state machines in VHDL by explicitly
instantiating a state register and then designing combinational logic using
case or concurrent signal assignment statements to compute the next state
and output. It is important to make sure the state register is initialized to a
known state at reset.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
One of the first descriptions of FSMs and sequential logic can be found in
Huffman’s “The synthesis of sequential switching circuits” [52]. Moore [83]
and Mealy’s [79] papers on sequential FSMs also provide background on the
subject. For a recent exploration of FSM theory, refer to Kohavi’s text in ref.

--- Page 465 ---
[68]. Many textbooks, such as Brown’s Fundamentals of Digital Logic [20],
explore the hand synthesis of state machine logic.
Readers interested in the tangential topic of traffic lights can read two
papers from 1927 [71, 76] discussing the use of this now ubiquitous
invention.
Exercises
14.1Homing sequences, I. The finite-state machine described by Table
14.2 does not have a reset input. Explain how you can get the
machine in a known state regardless of its initial starting state by
providing a fixed input sequence. An input sequence that always
takes an FSM to the same state is called a homing sequence.
14.2Homing sequences, II. Suppose the traffic-light controller FSM of
Table 14.4 did not reset to state GNS. Find a homing sequence for
the machine that will get it to state GNS.
14.3Modified traffic-light controller, I-I. Modify the traffic-light
controller FSM of Table 14.4 so that it makes lights go red in both
directions for one cycle before turning a light green. Show a state
table and state diagram for your new FSM.
14.4Modified traffic-light controller, I-II. Choose a state assignment for
the modified traffic-light controller of Exercise 14.3 and derive the
logic to compute the next-state and output values. Show Karnaugh
maps for the next-state variables and output variables and a gate-
level schematic for the FSM.
14.5Modified traffic-light controller, I-III. Write and verify the VHDL
that implements your state machine from Exercise 14.3.
14.6Modified traffic-light controller, II-I. Modify the traffic-light
controller FSM of Table 14.4 so that it takes an additional input,
carns, that indicates when there is a car waiting in the north–south
direction. Change the logic so that, once the light has changed to
east–west, it stays with east–west green until a car waiting in the
north–south direction is detected. Show a state table and state
diagram for your new FSM.
14.7Modified traffic-light controller, II-II. Choose a state assignment for
the modified traffic-light controller of Exercise 14.6 and derive the
logic to compute the next-state and output values. Show Karnaugh

--- Page 466 ---
maps for the next-state variables and output variables and a gate-
level schematic for the FSM.
14.8Modified traffic-light controller, II-III. Write and verify the VHDL
that implements your state machine from Exercise 14.6.
14.9Modified traffic-light controller, III-I. Modify the traffic-light
controller FSM of Table 14.4 so that the FSM stays in state GEW as
long as carew is true. Show a state table and state diagram for your
new FSM.
14.10Modified traffic-light controller, III-II. Choose a state assignment for
the modified traffic-light controller of Exercise 14.9 and derive the
logic to compute the next-state and output values. Show Karnaugh
maps for the next-state variables and output variables and a gate-level
schematic for the FSM.
14.11 Modified traffic-light controller, III-III. Write and verify the VHDL
that implements your state machine from Exercise 14.9.
14.12Modified pulse filler I. Modify the FSM of Example 14.1 so that it
expects pulses on input a every six cycles, rather than five. Draw the
state diagram for your modified FSM.
14.13Pulse-filler state table. Write a state table for the FSM of Example
14.1.
14.14Pulse-filler state assignment. Design a state assignment for the pulse-
filler FSM of Example 14.1 using three state variables. The R state
should have the encoding 000, and state 1 should have the encoding
001. Assign the remaining states so that as few state bits as possible
change on each transition.
14.15Pulse-filler implementation. Write equations for the next-state logic
for the pulse-filler FSM of Example 14.1. Use the following state
assignment: R = 000, 1 = 001, 2 = 010, 3 = 011, 4 = 100, 5 = 101, M
= 110, L = 111.
14.16Pulse-filler one-hot implementation. Draw a schematic diagram for
an implementation of the pulse-filler FSM of Example 14.1 using a
one-hot state assignment.
14.17FSM implementation. Implement the traffic-light controller FSM
with a state encoding where GNS = 00, YNS = 01, GEW = 10, and
YEW = 11. Show Karnaugh maps for the next-state variables and
output variables and a gate-level schematic for the FSM.

--- Page 467 ---
14.18Digital lock, I. Draw a state diagram and a state table for a digital
lock. The lock has two inputs, a and b, and one output, unlock. The
output is asserted only if the sequence a, b, a, a is observed. Each
element of the sequence must last for one or more cycles, and there
must be one or more cycles of both inputs low between the sequence
elements. After unlocking, either input going high causes unlock to
go low.
14.19Digital lock, II. Implement, in VHDL, your digital lock state machine
from Exercise 14.18.
14.20Basic vending machine, I. Exercises 14.20–14.22 will focus on
designing an FSM for a simple vending machine. This machine vends
a single $0.40 item and accepts only nickels and dimes. The input
signals are nickel and dime, and the outputs are vend and change. The
two input signals are pulsed high when a nickel ($0.05) or dime
($0.10) is inserted into the machine (only one will be high at a time).
When enough money has been added, the vend signal goes high for a
single cycle. If $0.45 had been inserted, change also pulses high for
one cycle. After vending an item, the state returns to the initial state
where no money has been inserted. We will explore a more flexible
vending machine in Section 16.3.1. Draw a state diagram and state
table for this machine.
14.21Basic vending machine, II. Using the state diagram from Exercise
14.20 and a binary state assignment, derive the output signals and
next-state logic.
14.22Basic vending machine, III. Implement the vending machine of
Exercise 14.20 in VHDL. Show a waveform of the outputs and state
when the user inserts consecutively two nickels, six dimes, and three
nickels.
14.23Vending machine with quarters, I. Modify your state table and
diagram from Exercise 14.20 to include a quarter ($0.25) input.
Assume the vending machine will output one nickel for every cycle
that change remains high.
14.24Vending machine with quarters, II. Write the VHDL that implements
the state machine of Exercise 14.23.
14.25Airplane indicator lights, I. Draw the state diagram and table for an
FSM that controls the seat-belt and no-electronics signs for a
commercial airliner. The state machine has three inputs: alt10k,

--- Page 468 ---
alt25k, and smooth. Whenever the airplane passes 10 000 (25 000)
feet moving in either direction, alt10k (alt25k) will pulse high for one
cycle. If the plane is not climbing, descending, or experiencing
turbulence, the smooth signal will be set to high. The state machine
should set the noelectronics signal to high when the plane is below 10
000 feet, and low otherwise. The seatbelt signal should be low only
when the plane is above 25 000 feet and smooth has been asserted for
at least five cycles. Assume that the plane is initially on the ground.
14.26Airplane indicator lights, II. Using a one-hot state encoding, derive
the logic needed to compute the next-state and output logic of your
state diagram from Exercise 14.25.
14.27Airplane indicator lights, III. Write the VHDL to implement your
state machine from Exercise 14.25.
14.28Anti-lock brakes, I. An FSM for an anti-lock brake system accepts
two inputs (wheel and time), and generates a single output (unlock).
The wheel input pulses high for one clock cycle each time the wheel
rotates a small amount. The time input pulses high for one clock cycle
every 10 ms. If the machine detects two time pulses since the last
wheel pulse, it concludes that the wheel is locked, and unlock is
asserted for one clock cycle to “pump” the brakes. After unlock goes
high, the machine waits for two time pulses before resuming normal
operation. Thus, there is a minimum of four time pulses between
unlock pulses. Draw a state diagram (bubble diagram) for this state
machine.
14.29Anti-lock brakes, II. Write and verify the VHDL to implement the
anti-lock brake state machine of Exercise 14.28.
14.30Direction sensor, I. A direction sensor is used to detect the direction
of a rotating gear. An input pulses each time a gear tooth is over the
left side or right side of the sensor. This machine has two inputs, il
and ir, and two outputs, ol and or. The FSM should output a one-
cycle pulse on ol any time a high level on il for one or more cycles is
followed, after zero or more cycles, by a high level on ir for zero or
more cycles. Similarly, a one-cycle pulse on or is output if a high
level on ir is followed by a high level on il. Wehave provided an
example waveform in Figure 14.21. Draw the state diagram and table.

--- Page 469 ---
Figure 14.21. Example timing diagram of the direction sensor for Exercise 14.30.
14.31Direction sensor, II. Write and verify the VHDL to implement the
direction sensor of Exercise 14.30.
1 We revisit asynchronous sequential circuits in Chapter 26.
2 We draw the circuit as shown in Figure 14.2(a). Many people (who do not obey the bubble rule)
draw it as shown in Figure 14.2(b).
3 An FSM where the output depends only on the current state and not on the input is sometimes
called a Moore machine. An FSM where the output depends on both the current state and the input
is sometimes called a Mealy machine.
4 This is not true of an asynchronous machine, where careful state assignment is required in order to
avoid races.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 470 ---
15
Timing constraints
How fast will an FSM run? Could making our logic too fast cause our FSM to fail? In thischapter, we will see how to answer these questions by analyzing the timing of our finite-statemachines and the flip-flops used to build them.Finite-state machines are governed by two timing constraints – a maximum delay constraintand a minimum delay constraint. The maximum speed at which we can operate an FSMdepends on two flip-flop parameters (the setup time and propagation delay) along with themaximum propagation delay of the next-state logic. On the other hand, the minimum delayconstraint depends on the other two flip-flop parameters (hold time and contamination delay)and the minimum contamination delay of the next-state logic. We will see that if the minimumdelay constraint is not met, our FSM may fail to operate at any clock speed due to hold-timeviolations. Clock skew, the delay between the clocks arriving at different flip-flops, affectsboth maximum and minimum delay constraints.
15.1 PROPAGATION AND CONTAMINATION DELAY
In a synchronous system, logic signals advance from the stable state at the end of one clock cycleto a new stable state at the end of the next clock cycle. Between these two stable states, they maygo through an arbitrary number of transitions.In analyzing timing of a logic block we are concerned with two times. First, we would like toknow for how long the output retains its initial stable value (from the last clock cycle) after aninput first changes (in the new clock cycle). We refer to this time as the contamination delay ofthe block – the time it takes for the old stable value to become contaminated by an inputtransition. Note that this first change in the output value does not in general leave the output in itsnew stable state. The second time we would like to know is how long it takes the output to reachits new stable state after the input has stopped changing. We refer to this time as the propagationdelay of the block – the time it takes for the stable value of the input to propagate to a stablevalue at the output.Propagation delay and contamination delay are illustrated in Figure 15.1. Figure 15.1(a) showsa combinational logic block with input a and output b. Figure 15.1(b) shows how the output bresponds when input a changes state. Up to time t1, both input a and output b are in their stablestate from the last clock cycle. At time t1 input a first changes. If a is a multi-bit signal, this is thetime when the first bit of a to change state toggles – other bits may change at later times. Whethersingle-bit or multi-bit, t1 is the time of the first transition on a. A given bit of a may toggle morethan once before reaching its new stable state. At time t2, a contamination delay of tcab after t1,

--- Page 471 ---
this first change on a may affect output b, and b may change state. Up until t2, output b wasguaranteed to have the steady-state value from the previous clock cycle. The first bit of b tochange toggles for the first time at time t2 as with a at t1; this bit of b may toggle again beforereaching a steady state, and other bits of b may change state later.
Figure 15.1. Propagation delay tdab and contamination delay tcab. Thecontamination delay of a logic block is the time from whenthe first input signal first changes to when the first output signal first changes. The propagation delay of a logic block is the timefrom when the last input signal last changes to when the last output signal last changes.
At time t3, input a stops changing state. From t3 until at least the end of the current clock cycle,signal a is guaranteed to be in its stable state. Time t3 represents the time at which the last bit of ato toggle toggles for the last time. At time t4, a propagation delay tdab after t3,the last change ofinput a has its final effect on output b. From this point to at least the end of the clock cycle,output b is guaranteed to be in its stable state for this clock cycle.We denote a propagation (contamination) delay from a signal a to a signal b as tdab (tcab). The“d” or “c” in the subscript denotes propagation or contamination. The rest of the subscript givesthe source signal and destination signal of the delay. That is, tdxy is the delay starting with atransition on signal x to a transition on signal y.As described in Section 5.1, we measure delay from the point where an input signal crosses50% of its signal swing to the point where an output signal crosses 50% of its signal swing.Measuring delay in this manner lets us sum propagation and contamination delays over linearpaths, as shown in Figure 15.2. The timing diagram in the figure shows that when two modulesare composed in series, their delays sum:
tcac = tcab + tcac, (15.1)
tdac = tdab + tdac. (15.2)
Figure 15.2. Propagation and contamination delay sum over a linear path. (a) Two modules in series with input a, intermediatesignal b, and output c. (b) Timing diagram showing that tcac = tcab + tcbc and similarly for propagation delay, tdac = tdab + tdbc.
To handle circuits with parallel paths, we simply enumerate all possible single-bit paths. Theoverall contamination delay is the minimum contamination delay over all paths, and the overallpropagation delay is the maximum propagation delay over all paths.

--- Page 472 ---
Figure 15.3(a) shows a circuit with a static-1 hazard (recall Section 6.10). The value in eachgate symbol is the delay of the gate in arbitrary time units. (Here we assume the contaminationand propagation delays of the basic gates are the same.) The timing diagram in Figure 15.3(b)illustrates the timing when signal a falls while b = 1 and c = 0. The output changes for the firsttime after two time units and for the last time after four time units. Hence, tcaf = 2 and tdaf = 4.
Figure 15.3. Circuit with a hazard illustrating propagation and contamination delay.
We can get the same result by enumerating paths. The minimum delay path is a–d–f with acontamination delay of 2, while the maximum path is a–e–f with a propagation delay of 4.Contamination and propagation delay are independent of input state. The contamination delayof the circuit in Figure 15.3(a) from a to f is 2, regardless of the state of signals b and c. Thisdelay represents the possibility that the output may change two time units after a transition on a,not a guarantee that it will change.Many people confuse contamination delay with minimum propagation delay. They are not thesame thing. The minimum propagation delay is the minimum value (over some range ofparameters: voltage, temperature, process variation, input combinations) of the time for thecorrect steady-state value to appear on the output of a circuit after a transition on the input. Incontrast, the contamination delay is the time until the output first changes from its old steady-state value after a transition on its input. These are not the same thing. The transition that sets thecontamination delay is not, in general, a change of the output to its steady-state value, but rather achange to some intermediate value – for example, the transition of a to 0 in the hazard of Figure15.3.
EXAMPLE 15.1 Propagation and contamination delay
Compute the propagation and contamination delays from input a to output q in the circuit shown in Figure 15.4. The numbersabove each gate give its delay in picoseconds.
Figure 15.4. Circuit for the delay calculation in Example 15.1.
The minimum delay is the path directly from a to the NOR gate to q. Thus, tcaq = 25 ps. The maximum delay includes the twoinverters and the NAND gate, giving tdaq = 65 ps.

--- Page 473 ---
15.2 THE D FLIP-FLOP
The timing constraints that determine whether an FSM will operate or not, and at what speed itwill operate, are governed by the clocked storage elements used to construct the FSM – in ourcase, the D flip-flop. A schematic symbol for a D flip-flop is shown in Figure 15.5. A multi-bit Dflip-flop is sometimes called a register. Here we consider the D flip-flop to be a black box – thatis, we look at its external behavior without looking inside to see how this behavior is achieved.We defer exploring inside the D flip-flop until Chapter 27.
Figure 15.5. D flip-flop: (a) schematic symbol; (b) timing diagram. The D flip-flop samples its input on the rising edge of theclock and updates the output with the value sampled. For correct sampling the input must be stable from ts before the clock risesto th after the clock rises. The output may change as soon as tcCQ after the clock. The output takes on the correct value no laterthan tdCQ after the clock.
A D flip-flop samples its input on the rising edge of the clock signal and updates its outputwith the value sampled. This sampling and update is illustrated in the timing diagram of Figure15.5(b). For the sampling to take place correctly, the input data (shown in the top waveform ofthe timing diagram) must be stable for a period before and after the rising edge of the clock.Specifically, the data must have reached its correct value (labeled x in the figure) at least a setuptime ts before the clock reaches its 50% point, and the data must be held stable at this value until
a hold time th after the clock has reached its 50% point.1 During the gray areas in the data
waveform, D can take on any value. However, it must remain stable with a value of x during thesetup- and hold-intervals for the flip-flop to sample the value x correctly.If the input meets its setup- and hold-time constraints, the flip-flop will update the output withthe sampled value x, as shown on the bottom waveform of Figure 15.5(b). The old value (whichwas sampled on the previous rising edge of the clock) will remain stable on the output until acontamination delay tcCQ after the rising edge of the clock. The circuit may continue to rely onthe old value being stable up until this point in time. After the contamination delay the output ofthe flip-flop may change, but not necessarily to the correct value. This period where the outputvalue is not guaranteed is shaded gray in the figure. At a propagation delay tdCQ after the risingedge of the clock, the output is guaranteed to have the value x sampled from the input. It will thenhold this value stable until tcCQ after the next rising edge of the clock.
15.3 SETUP- AND HOLD-TIME CONSTRAINTS
Now that we have introduced the nomenclature, the timing constraints on a finite-state machineare quite simple. To ensure that the clock cycle tcy is long enough for the longest path to satisfythe setup time of the D flip-flop, we must satisfy the following:

--- Page 474 ---
tcy ≥ tdCQ + tdMax + ts, (15.3)
where tdMax is the maximum propagation delay from the output of a D flip-flop to the input of aD flip-flop.We also must ensure that no signal is contaminated so quickly as to violate the hold-timeconstraint on the input of a D flip-flop by satisfying
th ≤ tcCQ + tcMin, (15.4)
where tcMin is the minimum contamination delay from the output of a D flip-flop to the input of aD flip-flop.The two constraints (15.3) and (15.4) govern system timing. The setup-time constraint (15.3)determines performance by giving the minimum cycle time tcy at which the circuit will operate.The hold-time constraint, on the other hand, is a correctness constraint. If Equation (15.4) isviolated, the circuit may not meet its hold time constraint – and hence may malfunction –regardless of the cycle time.Figure 15.6 shows a simple finite-state machine that we shall use to illustrate setup- and hold-time constraints. The FSM consists of two flip-flops. The upper flip-flop generates state bit a thatpropagates through a maximum-length (maximum propagation delay) logic path (Max) togenerate signal b. Signal b is in turn sampled by the lower flip-flop. The lower flip-flop generatessignal c, which propagates through a minimum-length (minimum contamination delay) block togenerate signal d, which is sampled by the upper flip-flop. Note that the destination flip-flop of aminimum-delay path is not necessarily the source flip-flop of a maximum-delay path (and viceversa). In general, we need to test all possible paths from all flip-flops to all flip-flops to find theminimum and maximum paths.
Figure 15.6. A simple FSM to illustrate setup and hold constraints.
The maximum-delay path from the upper flip-flop to the lower flip-flop of Figure 15.6 stressesthe setup time of the lower flip-flop. If this path is too slow, the next clock edge may arrive at thelower flip-flop before its input signal b has settled at its final value for the cycle. Figure 15.7repeats Figure 15.6 with this path highlighted. A timing diagram corresponding to this path isshown in Figure 15.8. Suppose the rising edge of the clock samples value x on signal d, then,after a flip-flop propagation delay tdCQ, flip-flop output a will take on value x and hold this value

--- Page 475 ---
through the remainder of the clock cycle. Signal a is input to combinational block Max, whichgenerates signal b. After an additional propagation delay from a to b, tdab (which corresponds totdMax in constraint (15.3)), signal b takes on its final value for the clock cycle f(x). Signal b mustsettle at this final value at least ts before the rising edge of the next clock for constraint (15.3) tobe satisfied. The sum of the propagation delays along the maximum path and the setup time mustbe less than the cycle time. In the timing diagram, signal b settles slightly early, leaving a timingmargin, or slack time, of tslack. The clock cycle tcy could be reduced by tslack and the setupconstraint would still be met.
Figure 15.7. Setup-time constraint. The maximum path from the clock on a source flip-flop to the clock on a destination flip-flopis shaded. From the rising edge of the clock, the signal must propagate to the Q output of the flip-flop (tdCQ) and propagatethrough the maximum-delay logic path (tdab)at least a setup time (ts) before the next clock edge.
Figure 15.8. Timing diagram illustrating the setup-time constraint.
The minimum-delay path from the lower flip-flop to the upper flip-flop of Figure 15.6 stressesthe hold time of the upper flip-flop. If this path is too fast, signal d might change before a holdtime after the rising edge of the clock. Figure 15.9 shows this timing path highlighted. A timingdiagram illustrating the signals along this path is shown in Figure 15.10. A flip-flopcontamination delay tcCQ after the rising edge of the clock, signal c may first change. Acontamination delay of the logic block tccd (which corresponds to tcMin in constraint (15.4)) later,signal d may change. For the hold-time constraint to be satisfied, this first change on signal d isnot allowed to occur until th after the rising edge of the clock. The sum of the contaminationdelays along the minimum path must be larger than the hold time. In the figure, thecontamination delays exceed the hold time by a considerable timing margin or slack time, tslack.

--- Page 476 ---
Figure 15.9. Hold-time constraint. The minimum contamination delay path from the clock on a source flip-flop to the clock on adestination flip-flop is shaded. From the rising edge of the clock, the contamination delay must be long enough for signal d toremain stable until a hold time th after this clock edge.
Figure 15.10. Timing diagram illustrating the hold-time constraint.
EXAMPLE 15.2 Setup and hold time
Consider a D flip-flop with ts = 50 ps, th = 40 ps, and tcCQ = tdCQ = 60 ps, which is used to implement the state register of a finite-state machine. The next-state logic has a propagation delay of td = 800 ps and a contamination delay of tc = 50 ps. Compute thesetup- and hold-time slack for this arrangement operating at fcy = 1 GHz.For the setup constraint, we write
The hold-time slack is given by
15.4 THE EFFECT OF CLOCK SKEW
On an ideal chip, the clock signal would change at the input of all flip-flops at the same time. Inpractice, device variations and wire delays in the clock distribution network cause the timing ofthe clock signal to vary slightly from flip-flop to flip-flop. We refer to this spatial variation in

--- Page 477 ---
clock timing as clock skew. Clock skew adversely affects both the setup- and hold-timeconstraints. With a skew of tk, these two constraints become
tcy ≥ tdCQ + tdMax + ts + tk (15.5)
and
th ≤ tcCQ + tcMin − tk. (15.6)
Figure 15.11 shows the FSM of Figure 15.5 with clock skew added. A delay line (the oval-shaped block) with a delay of tk (the magnitude of the skew) is connected between the clock inputand the clock to the upper flip-flop. Hence each edge of the clock arrives at the upper flip-flop atime tk later than it arrives at the lower flip-flop. Delaying the clock to the source of themaximum-length path causes this path effectively to get longer. In a similar manner, delaying theclock to the destination of the minimum-length path effectively makes this path shorter.
Figure 15.11. FSM of Figure 15.5 with clock skew.
The effect of skew on the minimum-length path, and hence on the hold-time constraint, isshown in Figure 15.12. The contamination delays from the clock to c to d add as above. However,now signal d must stay stable until th after the delayed clock clkd or th + tk after the original clockclk. The effect is the same as increasing the hold time by tk.
Figure 15.12. Timing diagram showing the effect of clock skew on the hold-time constraint.

--- Page 478 ---
The timing diagram of Figure 15.13 illustrates the effect of clock skew on the setup-timeconstraint. Delaying the clock to the upper flip-flop delays the transition of a by tk, effectivelyadding tk to the maximum path.
Figure 15.13. Timing diagram showing the effect of clock skew on the setup-time constraint.
EXAMPLE 15.3 Clock skew
Repeat the slack calculation of Example 15.2 to include the effect of tk = 75 ps of clock skew.Skew always reduces slack (margin). With skew, the calculation of the setup slack becomes
The hold-time slack with skew is given by
With 75 ps of clock skew, the system no longer statisfies the hold-time constraint – as indicated by the negative slack.
15.5 TIMING EXAMPLES
We will now consider an example of a 16-bit state machine where the next state is the currentstate multiplied by 3 (Figure 15.14). We will use a ripple-carry adder (see Section 10.2) tocompute the sum of the two values and store it in the flip-flops. Assume that the contaminationdelay, tcFA, of a full-adder block is 10 ps from any input, and that the propagation delay, tdFA, is30 ps. The minimum contamination delay between flip-flops is 10 ps, and the maximumpropagation delay is 16tdFA = 480 ps.

--- Page 479 ---
Figure 15.14. The 16-bit circuit we use in Section 15.5. The minimum logic contamination delay is that of one full adder, and thepropagation delay is that of 16 full adders.
Assume that the flip-flops have a tcCQ and tdCQ of 10 ps and 20 ps, respectively. The flip-flopsalso have a 20 ps setup time and 10 ps hold time. First, we will check that our circuit meets hold-time constraints:
th ≤ tcCQ + tcFA,
10 ps ≤ 10 ps + 10 ps.
Next, we compute the maximum cycle time:
tcy ≥ tdCQ + td + ts,
tcy = 20 + 480 + 20 = 520 ps.
These equations are still valid even if any of the flip-flop parameters are negative. The steps toperform skew-free timing analysis remain the same in any situation: find the minimum andmaximum logic delay, and check Equations (15.3) and (15.4).To build a more robust circuit, we wish to check that we have no timing violations, even in thepresence of clock skew of up to 20 ps. This clock skew can be in either direction between anytwo flip-flops. Again, we begin with the hold time:
th ≤ tcCQ + tcFA − tk,
10 ≤ 10 + 10 − 20.
We have an error: hold time has been violated. Unlike setup violations, we cannot simplyincrease our cycle time to fix the problem. We must redesign the flip-flop, modify the clockdistribution to have less skew, or add extra logic at the input of the flip-flop. The easiest solution,

--- Page 480 ---
and the one we choose, is to add extra logic. To do so, we must insert logic with a contaminationdelay of 10 ps immediately before the input of each flip-flop (or immediately after the output).We must include this new delay in our cycle time computation (we assume the propagation andcontamination delay of this logic to be equal):
tcy ≥ tdCQ + td + textra + ts + tk,
tcy = 20 + 480 + 10 + 20 + 20 = 550 ps.
Our example circuit is able to run at a frequency of 1.8 GHz.
15.6 TIMING AND LOGIC SYNTHESIS
For every design, the timing analysis we performed in Section 15.6 must be repeated over alllogic paths between all possible combinations of flip-flops at every operating condition.2 With asmall number of gates, timing analysis performed by hand is time-consuming and error-prone.Timing checks become near impossible to do by hand with large amounts of logic. Thankfully,synthesis and timing tools do this analysis for us.Logic synthesis tools, which transform VHDL into logic gates, have timing models for eachgate. Given an operating condition, logic, and constraints, this tool will determine whether timinghas been violated on any path. If the tool finds a timing violation, it will try to replace thecombinational logic with an implementation that meets the timing constraints. Instead of alwaysstarting with the fastest implementation of a design, tools use an iterative approach. The tool firstgenerates minimum area (or energy) logic. The tool then generates faster implementations onlyfor the paths that violate setup time. For example, a VHDL addition may first be implemented asa ripple-carry adder. If the ripple-carry adder is too slow, it will be replaced by a faster, largercarry-look-ahead adder.The standard-cell library is characterized to provide timing models, including flip-flopconstraints, for each cell at each of several process corners.3 The designer is responsible forspecifying the name of the clock signal, desired cycle time, and input/output delays in aconstraint file. An example script, written in the Tcl language, specifying these constraints andinvoking a synthesis tool, is shown in Figure 15.15. The script imports the RTL files – a statemachine for controlling a program counter – sets the clock name and period (ns), creates theclock, and specifies the input and output delays. The output of the synthesis tool includes a listingof all logic paths that violate timing. For example, Figure 15.16 shows a failing path from ourexample. This path runs from bit 11 to bit 26 of the PC and does not arrive within the setupwindow of the flip-flop.

--- Page 481 ---
Figure 15.15. A section of a Tcl script that sets up a clock with a 1 ns period. We also set the input and output delay of the systemto be 200 ps and 500 ps, respectively.
Figure 15.16. An example path that violates setup constraints after synthesis. This particular path, one of many failed paths, runsfrom the 11th bit of the program counter to the 26th bit. Often, the names of the logic signals are ambiguous when convertingfrom behavioral VHDL to gates.
In addition to the timing analysis performed by the synthesis tool, a separate static timinganalysis (STA) tool is typically used to verify that the final design – including interconnect

--- Page 482 ---
parasitics – meets all timing constraints.We can perform VHDL simulations with timing models. However, such simulations can findtiming errors only if the input vectors (the cases simulated) activate the critical path. Because it isvery difficult to prove that all paths have been tested, timing simulation is not sufficient to verifythat a chip meets all timing constraints. Static timing analysis, which finds all paths that violatetiming constraints, is required in order to prove that a chip meets timing.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to analyze the timing of synchronous logic circuits. Thetiming of a combinational logic module is described by two numbers. The contamination delay,tcab, of a circuit is the time from any change on input a until the previous steady-state value ischanged or contaminated on output b. Contamination delay is important for analyzing hold-timeviolations. The propagation delay, tdab, of a circuit is the time from the last change on input a tothe output b settling at its steady-state value for the remainder of the clock cycle. Propagationdelay is used to analyze setup-time violations.The timing of a D flip-flop or register is governed by four numbers. The input to the registermust be stable a setup time ts before the rising edge of the clock and must remain stable until ahold time th after the rising edge of the clock. If the setup- and hold-time constraints of a registerare met, the output of the register will be contaminated (the old value is no longer stable) acontamination delay tccq after the rising edge of the clock, and will be stable with the new value apropagation delay tdcq after the rising edge of the clock. For most flip-flops, tccq = tdcq, and theflip-flop changes to its final state in one step.From these timing properties of combinational logic and registers, we can derive that the hold-time constraint of a register will be met if
th ≤ tcCQ + tcMin − tk,
and that the setup-time constraint of a register will be met if
tcy ≥ tdCQ + tdMax + ts + tk,
where tk is the clock skew, tcMin is the minimum contamination delay over all combinationalpaths, and tdMax is the maximum propagation delay over all combinational paths.In practice, we use static timing analysis tools to verify that our designs meet setup and holdconstraints. These tools compute the delays of all possible combinational paths in a design andcheck that the setup- and hold-time constraints are met for every flip-flop.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Dally and Poulton [33] and Weste and Harris [112] detail timing analysis with both our simpleflip-flop-based clocking scheme and more complex latch-based schemes. A description of thealgorithms used in synthesis and optimization tools is presented in ref. [80]. A recent book fromBrunvand [21] details the design process, including using commercial timing analysis tools.
Exercises

--- Page 483 ---
15.1Propagation and contamination delays, I. Calculate the propagation and contaminationdelays of each input to the output in Figure 15.17. Assume that each gate has a 10 psdelay.
Figure 15.17. The simple combinational circuit used in Exercise 15.1.
15.2Propagation and contamination delays, II. Compute the contamination and propagationdelays of the circuit in Figure 15.18 from flip-flop A to the output. Assume that the delaythrough each gate is 10 ps.
Figure 15.18. The simple circuit used in Exercises 15.2–15.6. Labels for each flip-flop are in picoseconds, and each gate has a 10ps delay.
15.3Propagation and contamination delays, III. Compute the contamination and propagationdelays of the circuit in Figure 15.18 from flip-flop B to the output. Assume that the delaythrough each gate is 10 ps.15.4Propagation and contamination delays, IV. Compute the contamination and propagationdelays of the circuit in Figure 15.18 from flip-flop C to the output. Assume that the delaythrough each gate is 10 ps.15.5Propagation and contamination delays, V. Compute the contamination and propagationdelays of the circuit in Figure 15.18 from flip-flop D to the output. Assume that the delaythrough each gate is 10 ps.15.6Propagation and contamination delays, VI. What are the overall contamination andpropagation delays of the circuit in Figure 15.18? Assume that the delay through each gateis 10 ps.15.7Setup and hold, I. For flip-flop A in Table 15.1, draw a waveform showing the flip-flop’sinput going high just before ts and low just after th. Include clk, D, and Q (previously 0).Label all constraints on your diagram.

--- Page 484 ---
Table 15.1. Three different flip-flop specifications that we use throughout the exercises
Parameter (ps) FF A FF B FF C
ts 20 100 −30
th 10 −20 80
tcCQ 10 2 40
tdCQ 20 30 50
15.8Setup and hold, II. For flip-flop B in Table 15.1, draw a waveform showing the flip-flop’sinput going high just before ts and low just after th. Include clk, D, and Q (previously 0).Label all constraints on your diagram.15.9Setup and hold, III. For flip-flop C in Table 15.1, draw a waveform showing the flip-flop’s input going high just before ts and low just after th. Include clk, D, and Q(previously 0). Label all constraints on your diagram.15.10Setup and hold violations, I. For flip-flop A of Table 15.1 and a 2 GHz clock, checkFigure 15.19 for timing violations. If there is a hold violation, indicate where delay mustbe added, specify the necessary delay, and recheck for setup violations. If there is a setupviolation, calculate the maximum error-free frequency.
Figure 15.19. The simple logic circuit used in Exercises 15.10–15.12 and 15.22–15.24.
15.11 Setup and hold violations, II. For flip-flop B of Table 15.1 and a 2 GHz clock, checkFigure 15.19 for timing violations. If there is a hold violation, indicate where delay mustbe added, specify the necessary delay, and recheck for setup violations. If there is a setupviolation, calculate the maximum error-free frequency.15.12Setup and hold violations, III. For flip-flop C of Table 15.1 and a 2 GHz clock, checkFigure 15.19 for timing violations. If there is a hold violation, indicate where delay mustbe added, the necessary delay, specify and recheck for setup violations. If there is a setupviolation, calculate the maximum error-free frequency.15.13Logic constraints, I. For flip-flop A of Table 15.1 and a 1 GHz clock, for any block oflogic that separates two flip-flops, what is the minimum tc and maximum td?15.14Logic constraints, II. For flip-flop B of Table 15.1 and a 1 GHz clock, for any block oflogic that separates two flip-flops, what is the minimum tc and maximum td?

--- Page 485 ---
15.15Logic constraints, III. For flip-flop C of Table 15.1 and a 1 GHz clock, for any block oflogic that separates two flip-flops, what is the minimum tc and maximum td?15.16Avoiding hold violations, I. You are a designer tasked with implementing a flip-flop that,in a skew-free environment, eliminates all hold violations. Write an inequality that mustbe true about your flip-flop in order to avoid failure.15.17Avoiding hold violations, II. You are a designer tasked with implementing a flip-flop that,in an environment with skew tk, eliminates all hold violations. Write an inequality thatmust be true about your flip-flop in order to avoid failure.15.18Post-fabrication violations. After taping out a chip, it comes back from the fabricationplant and does not work. How can you test whether the failure is either a setup violation ora hold violation? Describe the tests to run.15.19Clock delay. Suppose the inner flip-flop in Figure 15.20 has ts = th = 50 ps and tdCQ = tcCQ
= 80 ps. What are ts, th, tdCQ, and tcCQ for the outer flip-flop.
Figure 15.20. An outer flip-flopismadebyinsertingtwo inverters with a combined delay of 40 ps between the clock input and aninner flip-flop. This figure is used by Exercise 15.19.
15.20Data delay. Repeat Exercise 15.19, but instead of having two inverters on the clk input,place them on the d input.15.21Output delay. Repeat Exercise 15.19, but instead of having two inverters on the clk input,place them on the q output.15.22Clock skew, I. Calculate the maximum allowable clock skew in Figure 15.19. Indicatebetween which pair of flip-flops the skew occurs and whether it will trigger a setup orhold violation. Use flip-flop specification A and a 2 ns clock. You may want to enumerateall possible paths and write the setup and hold equations.15.23Clock skew, II. Repeat Exercise 15.22, instead using flip-flop specification B and a 2 nsclock.15.24Clock skew, III. Repeat Exercise 15.22, instead using flip-flop specification C and a 4 nsclock.15.25Timing analysis. Multiplying two 64-bit numbers gives a 128-bit result.(a)Assuming the inputs and outputs are terminated by flip-flops, how many combinations ofstart and end flip-flops exist in the system?(b)It takes 30 s to check for a violation on a register–register path by hand. If you wanted tocheck for setup and hold violations on each of these paths in nine different processes,estimate the time it would take to perform a complete timing analysis on the multiplier.
1 Note that ts or th may be negative, but ts + th will always be positive.
2 Hold-time violations are more frequent with best-case logic delay: high voltage and cold temperature. Setup-time violations aremost common in worst-case conditions with a low operation voltage and a hot chip.3 These models and other characterization data are provided by the supplier of the standard-cell library. Characterizing astandard-cell library often requires more effort than designing the library.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 486 ---
16
Datapath sequential logic
In Chapter 14 we saw how a finite-state machine can be synthesized from
a state diagram by writing down a table for the next-state function and
synthesizing the logic that realizes this table. For many sequential
functions, however, the next-state function can be more simply described
by an expression rather than by a table. Such functions are more
efficiently described and realized as datapaths, where the next state is
computed as a logical function, often involving arithmetic circuits,
multiplexers, and other building block circuits.
16.1 COUNTERS
16.1.1A simpler counter
Suppose you want to build a finite-state machine with the state diagram
shown in Figure 16.1. This circuit is forced to state 0 whenever input r is
true. Whenever input r is false, the machine counts through the states from 0
to 31 and then cycles back to 0. Because of this counting behavior, we refer
to this finite-state machine as a counter.
Figure 16.1. State diagram for a five-bit counter.

--- Page 487 ---
We could design the counter employing the methodology developed in
Chapter 14. A VHDL description taking this approach for a three-bit counter
(eight states) is shown in Figure 16.2.1 A three-bit wide bank of flip-flops
holds the current state, count, and updates it from the next state, nxt, on
each rising edge of the clock. The matching case statement captures the state
table, specifying the next state for each input and current state combination.
Figure 16.2. Three-bit counter FSM specified as a state table.
While this method for generating counters works, it is verbose and
inefficient. The lines of the state table are repetitive. The behavior of the
machine can be captured entirely by the single line
nxt <= (others => ’0’) when rst else count+1;
We use array aggregate notation, “(others => ’0’)”, to specify a
std_logic_vector value with all elements equal to ’0’. Thisisadatapath

--- Page 488 ---
description of the finite-state machine in which we specify the next state as a
function of the current state and inputs.
A VHDL description of an n-bit counter design entity using such a
datapath description is shown in Figure 16.3. An n-bit wide bank of flip-
flops holds the current state, count, and updates it from the next state, nxt,
on each rising edge of the clock. A single concurrent signal assignment
statement describes the next-state function. The next state is 0 if rst is high,
or count + 1 otherwise.
Figure 16.3. An n-bit counter FSM specified with a single concurrent signal assignment statement.
A block diagram of this counter is shown in Figure 16.4. The figure
illustrates the datapath nature of this implementation. The next state is
computed by data flowing through paths involving combinational building
blocks – including arithmetic blocks and multiplexers. In this case, the two
building blocks are a multiplexer, which selects between reset (0) and
increment (count +1), and an incrementer, which increments count to give
count +1.

--- Page 489 ---
Figure 16.4. Block diagram of a simple counter. The counter state is held in a state register (flip-
flops). The next state is selected by a multiplexer to be zero if rst is asserted, or the output of an
incrementer (count +1) otherwise.
In general, a sequential datapath circuit takes the form shown in Figure
16.5. As with any synchronous sequential logic circuit, the state is held in a
state register. An output logic circuit computes the output signals as a
function of inputs and current state. The next state is computed by a next-
state circuit as a function of inputs and current state. What distinguishes a
datapath is that the next-state logic and output logic are described by
functions rather than tables. For our simple counter, the output logic is just
the current state, and the next-state logic is a selection between incrementing
or setting to zero. We will see more complex examples of sequential
datapath circuits in the following sections. However, they all retain this
functional description of the next-state and output functions.
Figure 16.5. In general, a sequential datapath circuit consists of a state register, next-state logic, and
output logic. The next-state and output logic are described by functions rather than tables.
16.1.2Up/down/load counter
Our simple counter had only two choices for next state: reset or increment.
Often we require a counter with more options for the next state. A counter
may need to count down (decrement) as well as count up; there may be cases

--- Page 490 ---
where it needs to hold its value; and, on occasion, we may need to load an
arbitrary value into the counter.
Figure 16.6 shows the VHDL description of such an up/down/load (UDL)
counter. The counter has four control inputs (rst, up, down, and load), and
one n-bit wide data input (input). The next-state function is described by a
matching case statement. Some CAD tools may have difficulty recognizing
that the result of concatenating the four std_logic signals rst, up, down, and
output has type std_logic_vector. Hence, we use the qualified expression
std_logic_vector’(rst & up & down & load). If reset (rst) is asserted,
the next state is 0. Otherwise, if up is asserted, the next state is out + 1.
Ifdown is asserted (and not up or rst), the counter decrements by setting the
next state to output - 1. The counter is loaded when load is asserted by
setting the next state to input. Finally, if none of the control inputs are
asserted, the counter holds its present value by setting next to output.

--- Page 491 ---
Figure 16.6. VHDL description of an up/down/load (UDL) counter.
This description accurately captures the function of the UDL counter and
is adequate for most purposes. However, it is somewhat inefficient in that it
will result in the instantiation of both an incrementer (to compute output +
1) and a decrementer (to compute output - 1). From our brief study of
computer arithmetic (see Chapter 10), we know that these two circuits could
be combined.
If we are in an operating mode where saving a few gates matters (which is
unlikely), we can describe a more economical counter circuit as shown in
Figure 16.7. This circuit factors the increment and decrement operations out
of the case statement. Instead, it realizes them in signal outpm1 (out plus or
minus 1). This signal is generated by a concurrent signal assignment

--- Page 492 ---
statement that adds 1 to output if down is false, and adds −1 to output if
down is true. The code is otherwise identical to that of Figure 16.6.
Figure 16.7. VHDL description of an up/down/load counter with a shared incrementer/decrementer.
A block diagram of the UDL counter is shown in Figure 16.8. Like the
simple counter of Figure 16.4, and like most datapath circuits, the UDL
counter uses a multiplexer to select different options for the next state. Some
of the options are created by function units. Here the multiplexer has four
inputs – to select the input (load), the output of the incrementer/decrementer
(up or down), 0 (reset), and count (hold). The single function unit is an
incrementer/decrementer that can either add or subtract 1 from the current
count. The down line controls whether to increment or decrement. A block of
combinational logic generates the select signals for the multiplexer by
decoding the control inputs. VHDL code corresponding to this block
diagram is shown in Figure 16.9.

--- Page 493 ---
Figure 16.8. Block diagram of an up/down/load counter.
Figure 16.9. VHDL description of an up/down/load counter using a shared incrementer/decrementer
and an explicit multiplexer.

--- Page 494 ---
16.1.3Atimer
In many applications, for example a more involved version of our traffic-
light controller, we would like a timer that can be set with an initial time t,
and that, after t cycles have passed, signals us that the time is complete. This
is analogous to a kitchen timer that you set with an interval, and it signals
you audibly when the interval is complete.
A block diagram of an FSM timer is shown in Figure 16.10. It follows our
familiar theme of using a multiplexer to select the next state from among
constants, inputs, and the outputs of function units (in this case a
decrementer). What is different about this block diagram is that it includes
an output function unit. A zero checker asserts signal done when the count
has reached zero.
Figure 16.10. Block diagram of a timer FSM.
To operate the timer, the time interval is applied to input and control
signal load is asserted to load the interval. Each cycle after this load, the
internal state count counts down. When count reaches zero, output done is
asserted and counting stops. The reset input rst is used only to initialize the
timer on power-up.
A VHDL description of the timer is shown in Figure 16.11. The style is
similar to our simple counter and structural UDL counter with a multiplexer
and a state register. The decrementer is implemented in the argument list of
the multiplexer. To keep the timer from continuing to decrement, we select
the zero input of the multiplexer when done is asserted and load is not. The
conditional signal assignment to done implements the zero checker.

--- Page 495 ---
Figure 16.11. VHDL description of a timer.
EXAMPLE 16.1 Increment/decrement-by-3 counter
Write a VHDL design entity for an arbitrary-width counter that, after being reset, increments each
clock by 3 if an inc input is asserted, decrements by 3 if a dec input is asserted, and holds its value
otherwise.
The VHDL code is shown in Figure 16.12. We define signal pm3 that is -3 if dec is true and 3
otherwise. We use the function conv_std_logic_vector defined in the standard package
ieee.std_logic_arith. The function takes two integer arguments. The first is a value to be converted
to a std_logic_vector and the second is the width of the resulting std_logic_vector. The signal pm3
is input to a single adder to achieve both increment and decrement. A matching case statement is used
to implement the multiplexer that selects the appropriate value for nxt. Note that if inc and dec are
asserted simultaneously nxt is set to an unspecified (don’t care) value, “(others => ’-’)”.

--- Page 496 ---
Figure 16.12. VHDL implementation of an increment/decrement-by-3 counter.
16.2 SHIFT REGISTERS
In addition to incrementing, decrementing, and comparing, another popular
datapath function is shifting. Shifters are particularly useful in serializers and
deserializers that convert data from parallel to serial form and back again.
16.2.1A simple shift register

--- Page 497 ---
A block diagram of a simple shift register is shown in Figure 16.13 and a
VHDL description of this circuit is given in Figure 16.14. Unless the shift
register is reset, the next state is the current state shifted one bit to the left,
with the sin input providing the rightmost bit (LSB). In the VHDL
implementation, the 2:1 multiplexer is performed using a conditional signal
assignment statement, and the left shift is performed by the expression
output(n-2 downto 0) & sin
Figure 16.13. Block diagram of a simple shift register.
Figure 16.14. VHDL description of simple shift register. If rst is asserted, the register is set to all 0s;
otherwise it shifts left, with input sin filling the LSB.

--- Page 498 ---
Here the concatenate operation is used to concatenate the rightmost n − 1
bits of output with sin, effectively shifting the bits of output one position
to the left and inserting sin into the LSB.
This simple shift register could be used, for example, as a deserializer. A
serial input is received on input sin and, every n clocks, the parallel output
is read from output. A framing protocol of some type is necessary to
determine where each parallel symbol starts and stops; i.e., during which
clock the parallel output should be read.
16.2.2Left/right/load (LRL) shift register
Analogously to our complex counter, we can make a complex shift register
that can be loaded and shifts in either direction. The block diagram of this
left/right/load (LRL) shift register is shown in Figure 16.15 and the VHDL
description is shown in Figure 16.16. The design entity uses a matching case
statement to select between zero, a left shift (done with concatenation), a
right shift (also done with concatenation), the input, and the output. Note
that the shift expressions
output(n-2 downto 0) & sin
sin & output(n-1 downto 1)
do not actually generate any logic. This shift operation is just wiring – from
sin and the selected bits of output to the appropriate input bits of the
multiplexer.


--- Page 499 ---
Figure 16.15. Block diagram of a left/right/load shift register.
Figure 16.16. VHDL description of a left/right/load shift register.
16.2.3Universal shifter/counter
If we made the LRL shift register design entity also increment, decrement,
and check for zero, it could serve in place of any of the design entities we
have discussed so far in this section. This idea is not as far-fetched as it may
seem. At first you may think that using a full-featured design entity when all
we need is a simple counter is wasteful. However, most synthesis systems
given constant inputs will eliminate logic that is never used (i.e., if up and
down are always zero the incrementer/decrementer will be eliminated). Thus,
the unused logic should not cost us anything in practice.2 The advantage of
the universal shifter/counter is that it comprises a single design entity to
remember and maintain.

--- Page 500 ---
VHDL for a universal shifter/counter design entity is shown in Figure
16.17. This code largely combines the code of the individual design entities
above. It uses a seven-input multiplexer to select between input, current
state, increment, decrement, left shift, right shift, and zero. The
increment/decrement is done with an assignment (as with the UDL counter),
and the shifts are done with concatenation (as with the LRL shifter).
Figure 16.17. VHDL description of a universal shifter/counter using a shared
incrementer/decrementer and an explicit multiplexer. An arbiter is used to ensure that no more than

--- Page 501 ---
one multiplexer select line is asserted at a time.
One thing that is new with the universal design entity is the use of an
arbiter RArb to make sure that no two select inputs to the multiplexer are
asserted at the same time. This arbitration was explicitly coded in the design
entities above. With seven select inputs, it is easier to instantiate the arbiter
component to perform this logic. In many uses of the universal
shifter/counter (or any of our other datapath design entities) we can be
certain that two command inputs will not be asserted at the same time. In
these cases, we don’t need the arbitration (whether done with a component
or explicitly). However, to verify that the command inputs are in fact one-
hot, it is useful to code an assertion into the design entity. For example, to
assert a signal is one-hot, the user can write
count <= ("0" & input(0)) + ("0" & input(1)) + ("0" &
input(2));
err <= ’1’ when count > 1 else ’0’;
The designer must check for this error condition on every clock edge. The
assertion is a logical expression that generates no gates,3 but flags an error
during simulation if the expression is violated.
EXAMPLE 16.2 Variable shift amount
Write a VHDL design entity for a shift register that shifts zero, one, two, or three bits left, as
determined by a two-bit input sh_amount. The bits on the right are filled by a three-bit input sin MSB
first.
The VHDL code is shown in Figure 16.18. We first concatenate output with sin, which effectively
shifts output three bits left. We cast the result to type unsigned since the shift operation must know
whether the shifted value is signed or unsigned. We then shift the concatenated value to the right by 3-
sh_amount, which puts output in the proper location with the new bits filled by sin MSB first. The
right-hand operator to the srl shift operator must have type integer. Hence we first convert
sh_amount to integer by first casting it to type unsigned then calling the function to_integer
defined in ieee.numeric_std.

--- Page 502 ---
Figure 16.18. VHDL for the variable shifter described in Example 16.2.
16.3 CONTROL AND DATA PARTITIONING
A common theme in digital design is the separation of a design into a control
finite-state machine and a datapath, as shown in Figure 16.19. The datapath
computes its next state via multiplexers and function units – like the counters
and shift registers in this chapter. The control FSM, on the other hand,
computes its next state via a state table. The inputs to the design entity are
separated into control inputs (that affect the state of the control FSM) and
data inputs (that supply values to the datapath). Design entity outputs are
partitioned in a similar manner. The control FSM controls the operation of
the datapath via a set of command signals. The datapath communicates back
to the control FSM via a set of status signals.

--- Page 503 ---
Figure 16.19. Systems are often partitioned into datapath, where the next state is determined by
function units, and control, where the next state is determined by state tables.
The counter and shifter examples we have looked at so far in this chapter
are degenerate examples of this organization. They each consist of a
datapath – with multiplexers and function units (shifters, incrementers,
and/or adders) – and a control unit. However, their control units have been
strictly combinational. The datapath commands (e.g., multiplexer selects and
add/subtract controls) and control outputs have been functions solely of the
current control inputs and datapath status. In this section we will examine
two examples of design entities where the control section includes internal
state.
16.3.1Example: vending machine FSM
Consider the problem of designing the controller for a soft-drink vending
machine. The specification is as follows. The vending machine accepts
nickels, dimes, and quarters. Whenever a coin is deposited into the coin slot,
a pulse appears for one clock cycle on one of three lines indicating the type
of coin: nickel, dime, or quarter. The price of the item is set on an n-bit
switch internal to the machine (in units of nickels), and is input to the

--- Page 504 ---
controller on the n-bit signal price. When sufficient coins have been
deposited to purchase a soft drink, the status signal enough is asserted. Any
time enough is asserted and the user presses a dispense button, signal serve
is asserted for exactly one cycle to serve the soft drink. After asserting serve,
the FSM must wait until signal done is asserted, indicating that the
mechanism has finished serving the soft drink. After serving, the machine
returns change (if any) to the user. It does this one nickel at a time, asserting
the signal change, for exactly one cycle and waiting for signal done to
indicate that a nickel has been dispensed before dispensing the next nickel or
returning to its original state. Any time the signal done is asserted, we must
wait for done to go low before proceeding.
We start by considering the control part of the machine. First, we look at
the inputs and outputs. All of the inputs except price (rst, nickel, dime,
quarter, dispense, and done) are control inputs, and both of the outputs
(serve and change) are control outputs. Status signals that we need from the
datapath include a signal enough (that indicates that enough money has been
deposited) and a signal zero (that indicates that no more change is owed).
Commands to the datapath are considered below when we look at the data
state.
Now consider the states of the control portion of the machine. As
illustrated in the state diagram of Figure 16.20, our vending machine
operates in three main phases.4 First, during the deposit phase (state deposit),
the user deposits coins and then presses dispense. When signal dispense and
enough are both asserted, the machine advances to the serving phase (states
serve1 and serve2). In state serve1 it waits for signal done to indicate that the
soft drink has been served, and in state serve2 it waits for done to be
deasserted. We assert the output serve during the first cycle only of state
serve1. If there is no change to be dispensed, zero is true, the FSM returns to
the deposit state from serve2. However, if there is change to be dispensed,
the FSM enters the change phase (states change1 and change2). The machine
cycles through these states, asserting change and waiting for done in
change1 and waiting for done to go low in change2. We assert output change
during the first cycle of each visit to state change1. Only when all change
has been dispensed do we return to the deposit state.

--- Page 505 ---
Figure 16.20. State diagram for control part of a vending-machine controller. Edges from a state to
itself are omitted for clarity. If none of the logic conditions on edges out of a state are true, the
machine will remain in that state.
Now that we have the control states defined, we turn our attention to the
data state. This FSM has a single piece of data state – the amount of money
the machine currently owes the user – in units of nickels. We call this state
variable amount. The different actions that affect amount are
reset: amount ← 0;
deposit a coin: amount ← amount + value, where value = 1, 2,
or 5 for a nickel, dime, or quarter, respectively.
serve a drink: amount ← amount − price;
return one nickel of change: amount ← amount − 1.
otherwise: no change in amount.
We can now design a datapath that supports these operations. State
variable amount can be zeroed, can be added to or subtracted from, or can
hold its value. From these register transfers we see that we need the datapath
of Figure 16.21. The next state for amount next is selected by a 3:1
multiplexer that selects between 0, amount,orsum, the output of an
add/subtract unit that adds or subtracts value from amount. Thevalue is
selected by a 4:1 multiplexer to be 1, 2, 5, or price. We see from the figure
that the command signals needed to control the datapath are the two
multiplexer select signals and the add/subtract control.

--- Page 506 ---
Figure 16.21. Block diagram of a vending-machine controller.
VHDL code for our vending-machine controller is shown in Figures 16.22
through 16.25. The top-level design entity is shown in Figure 16.22. This
design entity just instantiates the control(VendingMachineControl) and data
(VendingMachineData) components and connects them up. The command
signals sub, selval, and selnext are declared at this level, as are the status
signals enough and zero.

--- Page 507 ---
Figure 16.22. VHDL top-level design entity for vending-machine controller just instantiates the
control and data components and connects them together.
The VHDL for the control design entity of our vending-machine controller
is split over two figures. Figure 16.23 shows the first half of the design
entity, which includes the logic for generating the output and command
variables. A variable first is defined, which is used to distinguish the first
cycle of states serve1 and change1. After one cycle in either of these states,
first goes low. This variable enables us to assert only the outputs for one
cycle on each visit to these states and to decrement only amount once on
each visit to the change1 state. Without the first variable, we would need to
expand both serve1 and change1 into two states. The outputs serve and
change are generated by ANDing first with signals that are true in states
serve1 and change1, respectively.

--- Page 508 ---
Figure 16.23. VHDL description of control design entity for vending-machine controller (part 1 of 2).
This first half of the control design entity shows the output and command variables implemented with
concurrent conditional signal assignment and concurrent simple signal assignment statements.
The datapath control signals are determined from input and state
variables. The two select signals are one-hot variables. Each bit is

--- Page 509 ---
determined by a logic expression. Signal selval (which selects the value
input to the add/subtract unit) selects price when in the deposit state (dep
true) and dispense is pressed. A 1 is selected if a nickel is input in the
deposit state or if we are in the change state. Inputs of 2 and 5 are selected in
the deposit state if a dime or a quarter is input, respectively. Signal selnext
selects the next state for the amount variable. Zero is selected if rst is true,
and the output of the add/subtract unit is selected if variable selv is true.
Otherwise, the current value of amount is selected. Variable selv is true in
the deposit state if a coin is entered or if dispense and enough are both true,
and it is true in the change state if first is true. Note that we can select
price to be the value whenever dispense is asserted in the deposit state
because we select the add/subtract output only if enough is also asserted.
Finally, the add/subtract control signal is set to subtract on dispense and
change actions. Otherwise the adder adds.
The second half of the control design entity in Figure 16.24 shows the
next-state logic. This logic is implemented using a matching case statement,
where the selection is based upon the concatenation of four input bits and the
current state. Most transitions encode to a single case alternative. For
example, when the machine is in the deposit state, and dispense and enough
are both true, the first case alternative "11--"& DEPOSIT is active. It takes
the next two case alternatives to encode when the machine stays in the
deposit state. A separate concurrent conditional signal assignment statement
is used to reset the FSM to the deposit state.

--- Page 510 ---
Figure 16.24. VHDL description of control design entity for vending-machine controller (part 2 of 2).
This second half of the control design entity shows the next-state function implemented with a
matching case statement.
A VHDL description of the vending-machine controller datapath is shown
in Figure 16.25. This code follows the datapath part of Figure 16.21 very
closely. A state register holds the current amount. A three-input multiplexer
feeds the state register with zero, the sum output of the add/subtract unit, or
the current value of amount. An add/subtract unit adds or subtracts value to
or from amount. A four-input multiplexer selects the value to be added or
subtracted. Finally, two conditional assignment statements generate the
status signals enough and zero.

--- Page 511 ---
Figure 16.25. Datapath for vending-machine controller.
A testbench for the vending-machine controller is shown in Figure 16.26
and waveforms from simulating the controller with this testbench are shown
in Figure 16.27. This testbench illustrates a new feature of VHDL introduced
in VHDL-2008: external names. In the report statement the first call to
to_hstring prints the value of signal state inside VendingMachineControl,
which is instantiated inside VendingMachine, whichin turn is instantiated

--- Page 512 ---
inside the testbench. Notice that rather than having to add signals to the
entity declarations for VendingMachineControl and VendingMachine we use
the external name syntax “<<signal DUT.VMC.STATE:
std_logic_vector>>” to access the value of state inside of
VendingMachineControl. Here DUT.VMC.STATE is the external path name for
the signal we would like to print out.

--- Page 514 ---
Figure 16.26. VHDL testbench for vending-machine controller.
Figure 16.27. Waveforms from simulating the vending-machine controller with the testbench of
Figure 16.26.
The test begins by resetting the machine. A nickel is then deposited,
followed by a dime – bringing amount to 3 (15 cents). At this point, we go
one cycle with no input to make sure amount stays at 3. We then assert
dispense to make sure that trying to dispense a soft drink before enough
money has been deposited doesn’t work. Next we deposit two quarters in
back-to-back cycles, bringing amount to 8 and then 13. When amount
reaches 13, signal enough goes high since we have exceeded the price
(which is 11). After an idle cycle, we again assert dispense. This time it
works. The state advances to 001 (serve1) and amount is reduced to 2 (price
of 11 deducted).
In the first cycle of the serve1 state (state = 001), serve is asserted. The
machine remains in this state for one more cycle, waiting for done to go
high. It spends just one cycle in state serve2 (state = 011), since done is
already low, and continues into state change1 (state = 010). On the first cycle
of change1, output change is asserted (to return a nickel to the user), and
amount is decremented to 1. The machine remains in the change1 state for
one more cycle waiting for done. It then spends just one cycle in state
change2 (state = 100) before returning to change1 – because zero is not true.
Again change is asserted and amount is decremented on the first cycle of
change1. This time, however, amount is decremented to zero and signal zero
is asserted. After waiting a second cycle in the change1 state, the machine

--- Page 515 ---
transitions through change2 and back to the deposit state – since zero is set
– ready to start again.
An alternative implementation of the vending machine as a single VHDL
design entity is shown in Figure 16.28. The control part of this machine is
identical to that of Figures 16.23 and 16.24 except that the logic to generate
signals selval and selnext is omitted. The datapath uses a single matching
case statement to select an increment, inc, which is zero when amount stays
constant.

--- Page 517 ---
Figure 16.28. An alternative version of the vending machine implemented as a single design entity.
The datapath is implemented as a single process that selects an increment. Part 1 of 2; part 2 is
identical to Figure 16.24.
16.3.2Example: combination lock
As our second control and datapath example, consider an electronic
combination lock that accepts input from a decimal keypad. The user must
enter the code as a sequence of decimal digits and then press an enter key. If
the user enters the correct sequence, the unlock output is asserted
(presumably to actuate a large bolt that unlocks a door). To relock the
machine, the user presses enter a second time. If the user enters an incorrect
sequence, a busy output is asserted and a timer is activated to wait a
predefined period before allowing the user to try again. The busy light
should not come on until the user enters the entire sequence and presses
enter. If the light were to come on at the first incorrect keypress, this would
give the user information that can be used to discover the code one digit at a
time.
There are three inputs to our lock system: key, key_valid, and enter. A
four-bit code key indicates the current key being pressed and is accompanied
by a signal key_valid that indicates when a key is valid. The keyboard is
preprocessed so that every key press asserts key and valid for exactly one
cycle. In a similar manner, the enter signal is preprocessed so that it is valid
for exactly one cycle each time the user presses the enter key to unlock or
relock the bolt. The length of the sequence is set by an internal variable
length, and the sequence itself is stored in an internal memory.
A state diagram describing the control portion of our combination lock
machine is shown in Figure 16.29. The machine resets to the enter state. In
this state the machine accepts input. Each time a key is pressed, it is checked
against the expected digit. If it is correct (kmatch) the machine stays in the
enter state; if not (valid ∧  kmatch), the machine transitions to the wait1 state.
The machine waits in the wait1 state until enter is pressed, and then enters
the wait2 state. The machine starts a timer in the wait2 state and remains in
this state, asserting busy until the timer signals done.

--- Page 518 ---
Figure 16.29. State diagram for control portion of combination lock.
When the entire code has been entered correctly, the machine will still be
in the enter state – an incorrect digit would have taken it to wait1 – and
lmatch will be true; lmatch will be true only if the length of the code entered
matches the internal length variable. If enter is pressed at this point, the
machine transitions to the open state (enter ∧  lmatch) and the bolt is
unlocked. A second enter in the open state returns to the reset state. If, in the
enter state, the enter key is pressed when the length does not match (there
are either too few or too many digits in the codeword) (enter ∧  lmatch), the
machine goes to the wait2 state.
A block diagram of the datapath portion of our combination lock is shown
in Figure 16.30. The datapath has two distinct sections. The upper section
compares the length and value of the code entered. The lower section times
the wait period when an incorrect code is entered. This section consists of a
single timer component that loads the timer interval twait when control
signal load is asserted. The timer then counts down. When it reaches zero,
status signal done is asserted.

--- Page 519 ---
Figure 16.30. Block diagram of datapath portion of combination lock.
The upper half of the datapath consists of a counter, a ROM, and two
comparators. The counter keeps track of which digit of the code we are on. It
is reset to zero before entering the enter state and then counts up as each key
is pressed. The counter output, index, selects the digit to be compared next.
Signal index is compared with length to generate status signal lmatch. It is
also used as an address for the ROM containing the code. The current digit
of the code is read from the ROM, signal code, and compared with the key
entered by the user to generate status signal kmatch. Figures 16.31 and 16.32
show a VHDL implementation of our combination lock. Here we have put
both the control and datapath in a single design entity. This eliminates the
code that is otherwise required, to wire together the control and data
sections, but for a large design entity can result in an unwieldy piece of code.

--- Page 520 ---
Figure 16.31. VHDL description of the combination lock (part 1 of 2). This section describes the
datapath and closely follows Figure 16.30.

--- Page 521 ---
Figure 16.32. VHDL description of the combination lock (part 2 of 2). This section describes the
control. Concurrent assignment statements generate the command and output signals. A process
describing combinational logic computes the next-state function.
The datapath portion of the design entity is shown in Figure 16.31. The
VHDL follows directly from the block diagram of Figure 16.30. An
up/down/load counter (see Section 16.1.2) is used for the counter. Only the
rst and up control inputs are used. The load and down are zero. The
synthesizer will take advantage of these zero control inputs when
synthesizing the counter and eliminate the unused logic. The timer
component of Section 16.1.3 is used to count down in the wait2 state. The
two comparators are implemented with assignment statements.

--- Page 522 ---
Figure 16.32 shows the control portion of the VHDL description of the
combination lock design entity. The top portion of the code generates the
output and next-state variables. Outputs busy and unlock are generated by
decoding the state variable state since these outputs are true whenever the
machine is in the wait2 and open states, respectively. The enter and wait1
states are decoded as well for use in the command equations. The rstctr
command signal is set to reset the digit counter on reset or in states that
transition to the enter state (wait2 and open) so the counter is zeroed and
ready to sequence digits in the enter state. Similarly, the load signal loads
the timer in states that transition to the wait2 state (enter and wait1) so it can
count down in wait2. The inc signal increments the counter in the enter state
each time a key is pressed. The next-state function is implemented with a
process.
Waveforms generated by simulating the combination lock design entity on
a sequence of test inputs are shown in Figure 16.33. The test visits all states
and traverses all edges of the state diagram of Figure 16.29. This is done
with three attempts to unlock the lock; one correct attempt and two failures.
After reset, the test first enters the correct sequence with a pause after the 1
and after the 7. On the cycle after entering the final 8, enter is pressed and
the next cycle unlock goes high and the machine enters the open state
(state = 1). After one cycle low, enter goes high again, returning the
machine to the enter state.

--- Page 523 ---
Figure 16.33. Waveforms generated by simulating the combination lock design entity of Figures 16.31
and 16.32.
The second attempt to unlock the lock involves entering an invalid code.
As soon as the first key is entered incorrectly (7 instead of 8), the machine
transits to the wait1 state (state = 2). It stays in this state until enter is
pressed, at which time it goes to the wait2 state (state =3). In the wait2 state
the busy output is asserted and the timer starts counting down from 4.5
The third attempt to unlock the lock involves entering a code of the wrong
length. After the first digit is entered correctly, enter is asserted. Because
the correct length code has not yet been entered (lmatch = 0), the machine
transits to the wait2 state and starts counting down the timer.
Summary
In this chapter you have taken a first step from module design to system
design by learning the process of partitioning systems into datapaths and
control logic. You have also learned how to design datapath FSMs, state
machines where the next-state function is described by an expression, rather
than a table.

--- Page 524 ---
Common idioms for datapath FSMs include counters, where the next state
is derived by incrementing or decrementing the current state, and shift
registers, where the current state is shifted to produce the next state. These
FSMs may also include the ability to load an arbitrary value into the state
register.
Most systems are partitioned into datapaths and control logic. The
datapaths maintain the state that represents values, like the amount of change
in a vending machine or the magnitude of an audio signal. The next-state
function for the datapaths is defined by expressions, or structurally by
connecting multiplexers and function units.
The control logic, in contrast, maintains the state that represents discrete
modes of operation. While the operation of the datapath is described by a
block diagram or expression, the operation of the control logic is described
by a state diagram or state table.
Exercises
16.1Ring counter. Consider a datapath FSM with a four-bit state register
state whose next-state function is described by the following VHDL
statement:
nxt <= "000" when rst = ’1’ else (state(2 downto 0) & not
state(3));
Draw a state diagram for this FSM. Describe in plain English what
function this FSM performs.
16.2Linear-feedback shift register, I. Consider a datapath FSM with a
four-bit state register state whose next-state function is described by
the following VHDL statement:
nxt <= "0001" when rst = ’1’ else (state(2 downto 0) &
(state(3) xor state(2)));
Draw a state diagram for this FSM. Describe in plain English what
function this FSM performs.
16.3Linear-feedback shift register, II. Consider a datapath FSM with a
five-bit state register state whose next-state function is described by
the following VHDL statement:
nxt <= "00001" when rst = ’1’ else (state(3 downto 0) &
(state(4) xor state(2)));

--- Page 525 ---
Draw a state diagram for this FSM. Describe in plain English what
function this FSM performs.
16.4Saturating counter, I. Draw the block diagram for a counter that can
count up, count down, and load. This counter, however, must saturate
when counting up (at a programmable maximum count) and counting
down (at zero).
16.5Saturating counter, II. Write the VHDL for your saturating counter of
Exercise 16.4.
16.6Multiple counters, I. Modify the up/down/load counter of Figure 16.9
to have four separate count registers. Add a two-bit input rd that
selects which of the four counts are to be modified on any given
operation.
16.7Multiple counters, II. Modify the counter of Exercise 16.6 to have
both a source register input, rs, and a destination register input, rd.
This allows the user to set cnt3 = cnt0 − 1, for example (rd = 3, rs =
0). Use the rd input as the destination of a load.
16.8Fibonacci numbers, I. Draw the block diagram for a datapath circuit
to compute 16-bit Fibonacci numbers. During each cycle, the circuit
should output the next Fibonacci number (starting with 0 after reset).
The circuit should signal when the next number is larger than 16 bits.
16.9Fibonacci numbers, II. Implement your datapath FSM from Exercise
16.8 in VHDL.
16.10Vending machine, I. Modify the vending machine of Section 16.3.1 in
the following manner. When a coin is placed into the machine, the
appropriate signal will go high for an unknown number of cycles.
You should count each coin once only, and the input will go low
before the next coin has been inserted.
16.11 Vending machine, II. Modify the vending machine of Section 16.3.1
in the following manner. If the user keeps inserting money into the
current implementation, the counter could overflow. Design the
vending machine to have a saturating add that returns excess coins to
the user.
16.12Combination lock, I. Modify the combination lock of Section 16.3.2
in the following manner. Add the capability of the lock to have
multiple users (up to eight). The first digit selects the user, and the
rest of the inputs are the unlock sequence. All codes must be stored in
a single ROM.

--- Page 526 ---
16.13Combination lock, II. Modify the combination lock of Section 16.3.2
in the following manner. Allow the (single) user to get one value
incorrect and still unlock the lock. For example, if the code was
12345, any of the following should open the lock: 11345, 12385, or
12349. For a code of length n, what is the probability of guessing a
correct combination, both for the original implementation and for the
forgiving implementation?
16.14Tomato weighing, I. A packing plant packs tomatoes into cartons so
that each carton contains at least 16 oz of tomatoes. Each tomato
weighs 4–6 oz, so each carton will hold three or four tomatoes. The
next three questions will ask you to create a module that accepts, in
sequence, the weight of each tomato and outputs the total weight for a
package along with a valid signal. The inputs to your system are rst
(clears the weight), clk, weight(2 downto 0) (the weight of the
current tomato), and valid_in (the input weight is valid). When the
stored weight (output signal weight\_out(4 downto 0)) is16 oz or
more raise the valid_out signal. After the valid output signals more
than 16 oz of tomatoes, the next input weight should be added to 0,
starting a new package. Draw the block diagram for this module’s
datapath.
16.15Tomato weighing, II. Describe how to generate the control signals
(using either logic equations or a block diagram) for the datapath you
created in Exercise 16.14.
16.16Tomato weighing, III. Write and verify the VHDL to implement the
tomato weigher of Exercise 16.14.
16.17Calculator FSM, I. The datapath of an octal calculator has a 24-bit
input register in_reg and a 24-bit accumulator acc. The contents of
both registers are displayed as eight octal (radix-8) digits. Both are
cleared on reset. The calculator has buttons for C (clear), the numbers
0–7, and the functions +, −, and×. Pressing C once clears in_reg.
Pressing C a second time with no other intervening keys clears acc.
Pressing a number shifts in_reg to the left three bits and puts the
number pressed into the low three bits. Pressing a function performs
that function on the two registers and puts the result in acc. Draw a
block diagram for the datapath for this calculator.
16.18Calculator FSM, II. Draw a block diagram for the controller
component of the calculator described in Exercise 16.17.

--- Page 527 ---
16.19Calculator FSM, III. Write the VHDL to implement the calculator of
Exercise 16.17. Write the testbench and verify your VHDL code.
16.20Calculator FSM, IV. Describe, in English and with a block diagram,
what must change about your calculator to enable it to accept base-10
input (the numbers 0–9) instead of octal digits. Each digit must be
stored and displayed separately – that is, with a module like the
seven-segment display of Exercise 6.14.
16.21Ascending sequence detector. Write a VHDL design entity that
accepts an eight-byte sequence on eight-bit input input, where the
first byte is signaled by a single-bit start signal. Your design entity
should assert a single-bit done signal on the cycle after the last byte is
input. In the same cycle, it should assert a single-bit in_sequence
signal if the eight bytes were in ascending sequence; that is, if the (i +
1)st byte is one more than the ith byte, bi+1 = bi + 1, for i from 1 to 7.
16.22Descending sequence detector. Write a VHDL design entity that
accepts an eight-byte sequence on eight-bit input input, where the
first byte is signaled by a single-bit start signal. Your design entity
should assert a single-bit done signal on the cycle after the last byte is
input. In the same cycle, it should assert a single-bit in_sequence
signal if the eight bytes were in descending sequence; that is, if the (i
+ 1)st byte is one less than the ith byte, bi+1 = bi − 1, for i from 1 to 7.
1 A five-bit counter (32 states) using this approach would require 32 lines in the state table.
2 Check that this is true with your synthesis system before using this approach.
3 Many synthesis tools have built-in commands to declare what logic should not be synthesized.
Synopsys’s Design Compiler ®, for example, uses - pragma translate_off and - pragma
translate_on to turn synthesis off and on.
4 In this diagram, edges from a state to itself are omitted. If the conditions on all edges leading out of
the current state are not satisfied, the FSM stays in that state.
5 In practice, we would use a much longer timeout. However, using a short timeout greatly reduces
simulation time and results in an easier to read set of waveforms.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 528 ---
17
Factoring finite-state machines
Factoring a state machine is the process of splitting the machine into two
or more simpler machines. Factoring can greatly simplify the design of a
state machine by separating orthogonal aspects of the machine into
separate FSMs where they can be handled independently. The separate
FSMs communicate via logic signals. One FSM provides input control
signals to another FSM and senses its output status signals. Such
factoring, if done properly, makes the machine simpler and also makes it
easier to understand and maintain – by separating issues.
In a factored FSM, the state of each sub-machine represents one
dimension of a multidimensional state space. Collectively the states of all
of the sub-machines define the state of the overall machine – a single
point in this state space. The combined machine has a number of states
that is equal to the product of the number of states of the individual sub-
machines – the number of points in the state space.1 With individual sub-
machines having a few tens of states, it is not unusual for the overall
machine to have thousands to millions of states. It would be impractical to
handle such a large number of states without factoring.
We have already seen one form of factoring in Section 16.3 where we
developed a state machine with a datapath component and a control
component. In effect, we factored the total state of the machine into a
datapath portion and a control portion. Here we generalize this concept by
showing how the control portion itself can be factored.
In this chapter, we illustrate factoring by working two examples. In the
first example, we start with a flat FSM and factor it into multiple simpler
FSMs. In the second example we derive a factored FSM directly from the
specification, without bothering with the flat FSM. Most real FSMs are
designed using the latter method. A factoring is usually a natural

--- Page 529 ---
outgrowth of the specification of a machine. It is rarely applied to an
already flat machine.
17.1 A LIGHT FLASHER
Suppose you have been asked to design a light flasher. The flasher has a
single input in and a single output out. When in goes high (for one cycle) it
initiates the flashing sequence. During this sequence output out, which
drives a light-emitting diode (LED), flashes three times. For each flash, out
goes high (LED on) for six cycles. Output out goes low for four cycles
between flashes. After the third flash your FSM returns to the OFF state
awaiting the next pulse on in.
A state diagram for this light flasher is shown in Figure 17.1. The FSM
contains 27 states: six for each of the three flashes, four for each of the two
periods between flashes, and one OFF state. We can implement this FSM
with a big case statement, with 27 cases. However, suppose the
specifications change to require 12 cycles for each flash, four flashes, and
seven cycles between flashes. Because this machine is flat, any one of these
changes would require completely changing the case statement.

--- Page 530 ---
Figure 17.1. State diagram for the light flasher.
We will illustrate the process of factoring with our light flasher. This
machine can be factored in two ways. First, we can factor out the counting of
on and off intervals into a timer. This allows each of the six- or four-state
sequences for a given flash or interval to be reduced to a single state. This
factoring of timing both simplifies the machine and makes it considerably
simpler to change the on and off intervals. Second, we can factor out the
three flashes (even though the last is slightly different). This again simplifies
the machine and also allows us to change the number of flashes.
Figure 17.2 shows how the flasher is factored to separate the process of
counting time intervals into a separate machine. As shown in Figure 17.2(b),
the factored machine consists of a master FSM that accepts in and generates
out and a timer FSM. The timer FSM receives two control signals from the
master and returns a single status signal. The tload control signal instructs
the timer to load a value into a countdown timer (i.e., to start the timer), and
tsel selects the value to be loaded. When tsel is high, the timer is set to count
six cycles. The counter counts four cycles when tsel is low. When the

--- Page 531 ---
counter has completed its countdown, the done signal is asserted and
remains asserted until the counter is reloaded. A state diagram for this timer
is shown in Figure 17.2(c).2 The timer is implemented as a datapath FSM as
discussed in Section 16.1.3.
Figure 17.2. State diagram for the light flasher with on and off timing factored out into a timer. (a)
State diagram of master FSM. (b) Block diagram showing connections between master FSM and timer
FSM. (c) State diagram of timer FSM.
A state diagram of the master FSM is shown in Figure 17.2(a). The states
correspond exactly to the states of Figure 17.1, except that each sequence of
repeated states (e.g., A1 to A6) is replaced by a single state (e.g., A). The
machine starts in the OFF state. This state repeatedly loads the timer with the
countdown value for the on sequence (tsel = 1). When in goes true, the FSM
enters state A, out goes high, and the timer begins counting down. The
master FSM stays in state A, waiting for the timer to finish counting and
signal done. It will remain in this state for six cycles. During the last cycle in
state A, done is true, so tload is asserted (tload = done), and the counter is
loaded with the countdown value for the off sequence (tsel = 0). Note that
tload is asserted only during this final cycle of state A, when done is true. If

--- Page 532 ---
it were asserted during each cycle of state A, the timer would continually
reset and never reach DONE. Since done is true in this final cycle, the
machine enters state B on the next cycle and out goes low. The process
repeats in states B–E, with each state waiting for done before moving to the
next state. Each of these states (except E) loads the counter for the next state
during its last cycle by specifying tload = done.
If we compare the FSM of Figure 17.2 with the flat FSM of Figure 17.1,
we realize that the state of the flat machine has been separated. The portion
of the state that represents the cycle count during the current flash or space
(the numeric part of the state name, or the horizontal position in Figure 17.1)
is held in the counter, while the portion of state that reflects which flash or
space we are currently on (the alpha part of the state name, or the vertical
position in Figure 17.1) is held in the master FSM. By decomposing the state
into horizontal and vertical in this manner, we are able to represent all 27
states of the original machine with just two six-state machines.
VHDL code for the master FSM of Figure 17.2(a) is shown in Figure
17.3. The flash design entity instantiates a state register and a timer (see
Figure 17.4). It uses a case statement to describe the combinational next
state and output logic. A new type, fsm_output_t, is declared as a VHDL
record using the keyword record. A VHDL record bears similarity to a
struct in the C programming language. The fsm_output_t record type
contains three elements – output, tload, and tsel – all of type std_logic.
A signal fsm_out is declared to have type fsm_output_t. For each of the six
states a single assignment to fsm_out is used to assign design entity output
and the two timer controls. The right-hand sides of these assignments, e.g.,
(’0’,’1’,’1’), are aggregates. The elements of fsm_out are accessed using
a period (e.g., output <= fsm_out.output). The next state, nxt1, is
assigned using an if statement nested within each case alternative. Note that
the values assigned to timer control fsm_out.tload depend on the value of
the timer status done. This is an example of a state machine where an input
done directly affects an output, fsm_out.tload, with no delay. In each state,
the next state remains the same as the current state unless either input or
done is asserted. A final conditional signal assignment statement resets the
machine to the OFF state when rst is asserted.

--- Page 533 ---
Figure 17.3. VHDL description of the master FSM from Figure 17.2(a).

--- Page 534 ---
Figure 17.4. VHDL description for the timer FSM used by the light flasher of Figure 17.2.
For completeness, the VHDL code for the timer is shown in Figure 17.4.
The approach taken is similar to that described in Section 16.1.3.
The waveform display from a simulation of the factored flasher of Figure
17.2 is shown in Figure 17.5. The output, the fourth line from the top, shows
the desired three pulses with each pulse six clocks wide and spaces four
clocks wide. The state of the master FSM is directly below the output, and

--- Page 535 ---
the state of the timer is on the bottom line. The waveforms show how the
master FSM stays in one state while the timer counts down – from 5 to 0 for
flashes, and from 3 to 0 for spaces. The timer control lines (directly above
the timer state) show how in states A–E (1–5) tload follows done.
Figure 17.5. Waveform display showing a simulation of the factored light flasher of Figure 17.2.
We can factor our flasher further by recognizing that states A, C, and E are
repeating the same function. The only difference is the number of remaining
flashes. We can factor the number of remaining flashes out into a second
counter, as shown in Figure 17.6. Here the master FSM has only three states
that determine whether the machine is off, in a flash, or in a space. The state
that determines the position within a flash or space is held in a timer (just as
in Figure 17.2). Finally, the state that determines the number of remaining
flashes is held in a counter. Collectively the three FSMs, the master, the
timer, and the counter, determine the total state of the factored machine.
Each of the three sub-machines determines the state along one axis of a
three-dimensional state space.

--- Page 536 ---
Figure 17.6. The light flasher of Figure 17.1 factored twice. The position within the current flash is
held in a timer. The number of flashes remaining is held in a counter. Finally, whether the light is off,
in a flash, or in a space between flashes is determined by the master FSM. (a) Block diagram of the
twice-factored machine. (b) State diagram of the master FSM.
The state diagram of the master FSM for the doubly factored machine is
shown in Figure 17.6(b). The machine has only three states. It starts in the
OFF state. In the OFF state, both the timer and the counter are loaded. The
timer is loaded with the countdown value for a flash. The counter is loaded
with one fewer than the number of flashes required (i.e., the counter is
loaded with a 3 for four flashes). Having input in go high causes a transition
to the FLASH state. In the FLASH state the output out is true, the timer
counts down, and the counter is idle. During the last cycle of the FLASH
state the timer has reached its zero state and tdone is true. During this cycle
the timer is reloaded with the countdown value for a space. With tdone true,
the FSM proceeds from the FLASH state to the SPACE state if the counter is
not done (cdone false). Otherwise, if this was the last flash (cdone true), the
machine returns to the OFF state. In the SPACE state, the output is false, the
timer counts down, and the counter is idle. In the final cycle of the SPACE
state, tdone is true. This causes the counter to decrement, reducing the count

--- Page 537 ---
of the number of remaining flashes, and the timer to reload with the
countdown value for a flash.
The VHDL code for the doubly factored flasher of Figure 17.6 is shown in
Figure 17.7, and the VHDL description of the counter design entity is shown
in Figure 17.8. The output functions for the master FSM again use a single
assignment to a signal with a record type. An if statement is used to
compute the next state for the FLASH state to test both tdone and cdone. In
several states, status signal tdone is passed directly through to control
signals tload and cdec. The counter design entity is nearly identical to the
timer, but with slightly different control because the counter decrements only
when cdec is asserted, while the timer always decrements. With some
generalization a single parameterized design entity could be used for both
functions.

--- Page 538 ---
Figure 17.7. VHDL description of the master FSM from Figure 17.6.

--- Page 539 ---
Figure 17.8. VHDL description of the counter from Figure 17.6.
The waveforms generated by a simulation of the doubly factored light
flasher are shown in Figure 17.9. For this simulation, the counter was
initialized with a 3 so that the master FSM produces four flashes. The
different time scales of the three state variables are clearly visible. The
counter (bottom line) moves most slowly, counting down from 3 to 0 over
the four-flash sequence. It decrements after the last cycle of each space. At
each point in time, it represents the number of flashes left to do after the
current flash is complete. The master FSM state moves the next most slowly.

--- Page 540 ---
After starting on the 0 (OFF) state, it alternates between the 1 (FLASH) state
and the 2 (SPACE) state until the four flashes are complete. Finally, the timer
state moves most rapidly, counting down from 5 to 0 for flashes, or 3 to 0 for
spaces.
Figure 17.9. Waveform display showing a simulation of the doubly factored light flasher of Figure
17.6
17.2 TRAFFIC-LIGHT CONTROLLER
As a second example of factoring, we consider a more sophisticated version
of the traffic-light controller we introduced in Section 14.3. This machine
has two inputs, carew and carlt, that indicate that cars are waiting on the
east–west road (ew) and that cars are waiting in a left-turn lane (lt). The
machine has nine output lines that drive three sets of three lights each, one
set each for the north–south road, the east–west road, and the left-turn lane
(from the north–south road). Each set of lights consists of a red light, a
yellow light, and a green light.
Normally, the light will be green for the north–south road. However, if a
car is detected on the east–west road or the left-turn lane, we wish to switch
the lights so that the east–west or left-turn light is green (with priority going
to the left-turn lane). Once the lights have been switched to east–west or left-
turn, we leave them switched either until no more cars are detected in that
direction, or until a timer expires. The lights then return to green in the
north–south direction.
Each time we switch the lights, we switch the lights in the active direction
from green to yellow. After a time interval, we switch them to red. Then,

--- Page 541 ---
after a second time interval, we switch the lights in a different direction to
green. The lights are not allowed to change again until they have been green
for a third time interval.
Given this specification, we decide to factor the finite-state machine that
implements this traffic-light controller into five component modules as
shown in Figure 17.10. A master FSM accepts the inputs and decides which
direction should be green, signal dir. To determine when it is time to force
the lights back to north–south, it uses a timer, Timer1. It also receives a
signal ok back from the combiner that indicates that the sequence from the
last direction change is complete and the direction is allowed to change
again.
Figure 17.10. Block diagram of a factored traffic-light controller.
The combiner component maintains a current direction state, and
combines this current direction state with the light signal from the light FSM
to generate the nine light outputs lights. The combiner also receives direction
requests from the master FSM on the dir signal and sequences the light FSM
in response to these requests. When a new direction request occurs, the
combiner deasserts gn (sets it low) to ask the light FSM to switch the lights
to red. Once the lights are red, the current direction is set equal to the
direction request, and the gn signal is asserted to request that the lights be
sequenced to green. Only after the done signal from the light FSM has been

--- Page 542 ---
asserted, signaling that the sequence is complete and the lights have been
green for the required time interval, is the ok signal asserted to allow another
direction change.
The components here illustrate two types of relationships. The master
FSM and combiner components form a pipeline. Requests flow down this
pipeline from left to right. A request is input to the master FSM in the form
of a transition on the car_ew and car_lt inputs. The master processes this
request, and in turn issues a request to the combiner on the dir lines. The
combiner in turn processes the request, and outputs the appropriate sequence
on the lights output in response. We will discuss pipelines in more depth in
Chapter 23.
The ok signal here is an example of a flow-control signal. It provides
back-pressure on the master FSM to prevent it from getting ahead of the
combiner and light FSMs. The master FSM makes a request, and it is not
allowed to make another request until the ok signal indicates that the rest of
the circuit has finished processing the first request. We discuss flow control
in more detail in Section 22.1.3.
The other relationships in Figure 17.10 are master–slave relationships.
The master FSM acts as a master to Timer1, giving it commands, and
Timer1 acts as a slave, receiving the commands and carrying them out. In a
similar manner the combiner is the master of the light FSM, which, in turn,
is the master of Timer2.
The light FSM sequences the traffic lights from green to red and then back
to green. It receives requests from the combiner on the gn signal and
responds to these requests with the done signal. It also generates the three-bit
light signal, which indicates which light in the current direction should be
illuminated. When the gn signal is set high, it requests that the light FSM
switch the light signal to green. When this is completed, and the minimum
green time interval has elapsed, the light FSM responds by asserting done.
When the gn signal is set low, it requests that the light FSM sequence the
light signal to red – via a yellow state and observing the required time
intervals. When this is completed, done is set low. The light FSM uses its
own timer (Timer2) to count out the time intervals required for light
sequencing.
For the interface between the light FSM and the combiner, the done signal
provides flow control. The combiner can only toggle gn high when done is
low, and can only toggle gn low when done is high. After toggling gn, it

--- Page 543 ---
must wait for done to switch to the same state as gn before switching gn
again.
A state diagram for the master FSM is shown in Figure 17.11. The
machine starts in the NS state. In this state, Timer1 is loaded so it can count
down in the LT and EW states, and the requested direction is NS. State NS is
exited when the ok signal indicates that a new direction can be requested and
when one of the car signals indicates that there is a car waiting in another
direction. In the EW and LT states, the new direction is requested, and the state
is exited when ok is true and either there is no longer a car in that direction
or the timer has expired, as signaled by tdone.
Figure 17.11. State diagram for the master FSM of Figure 17.10.
The light FSM is a simple light sequencer similar to our light flasher of
Section 17.1. A state diagram for the light FSM is shown in Figure 17.12.
Like the light flasher, during the last cycle in each state the timer is loaded
with the timeout for the next state. The machine starts in the RED state. It
transitions to GREEN when the timer is done and the gn signal from the
combiner indicates that a green light is requested. The done signal is asserted
after the timer in the GREEN state has completed its countdown. The
transition to YELLOW is triggered by the timer being complete and the gn
signal being low.3 The transition from YELLOW to RED occurs on the timer

--- Page 544 ---
alone. The done signal is held high during the YELLOW state. It is allowed
to go low, signaling that the transition to RED is complete, only after the
timer has completed its countdown in the RED state.
Figure 17.12. State diagram for the light FSM of Figure 17.10.
A VHDL description of the master FSM for the factored traffic-light
controller is shown in Figure 17.13. This design entity instantiates a timer
and then uses a case statement to realize a three-state FSM that exactly
follows the state diagram of Figure 17.11. “if” statements are used for the
next-state logic. A chain of four if-elsif-else statements is used in state
M_NS to test in turn signals ok, car_lt, and car_ew.

--- Page 546 ---
Figure 17.13. VHDL description of the master FSM for the traffic-light controller.
The master FSM does not instantiate the combiner. Both the master and
the combiner are instantiated as peer components at the top level.
A VHDL description of the combiner design entity is shown in Figure
17.14. This design entity accepts a dir input from the master FSM, responds
to the master FSM with flow-control signal ok, and generates the lights
output. The key piece of state in the combiner design entity is the current
direction register cur_dir. This holds the direction that the light FSM is
currently sequencing. It is updated with the requested direction, dir, when
gn and done are both low. This occurs when the combiner has requested that
the lights be sequenced to red (gn low) and the light FSM has completed this
requested action (done low).

--- Page 548 ---
Figure 17.14. VHDL description of the combiner for the traffic-light controller.
The gn command, which requests the light FSM to sequence the lights to
green, is asserted any time the current direction and the requested direction
match. When the master FSM requests a new direction, this causes gn to go
low – requesting the light FSM to sequence the lights red in preparation for
the new direction.
The ok response to the master FSM is asserted when gn and done are both
true. This occurs when the light FSM has completed sequencing the
requested direction to green.
The lights output is computed by a case statement with the current
direction as the case variable. This case statement inserts the light output
from the light FSM into the position corresponding to the current direction
and sets the other positions to red.
A VHDL description of the light FSM is shown in Figure 17.15. The
design entity instantiates a timer and then uses a case statement to
implement an FSM with state transitions as shown in Figure 17.12. VHDL
select statements are used for the next-state logic.

--- Page 550 ---
Figure 17.15. VHDL description of the light FSM for the traffic-light controller.
Waveforms from a simulation of the factored traffic-light controller are
shown in Figure 17.16. The machine is initially reset with the master FSM in
the NS state (00). Output dir is also NS (00). The ok line is initially low
because the light FSM has not yet finished its sequencing to make the lights
green in the NS direction. The lights are initially all red (444) but change
after one cycle to be green in the north–south direction (144).
Figure 17.16. Waveform display showing a simulation of the factored traffic-light controller.
The light FSM is initialized to the RED (00) state and advances to the
GREEN state because gn and tdone are both asserted. In the GREEN state it
starts a timer and waits until tdone is again asserted before signaling done to
the combiner, which in turn causes the combiner to signal ok to the master
FSM.
Because car_ew is asserted, once the ok signal goes high, the master FSM
requests a change in direction to east–west by setting dir to 01. The
combiner responds by setting gn low to request the light FSM to sequence
the current direction’s light to red. The light FSM in turn responds by
transitioning to the YELLOW state (10), which causes light to go to yellow (2)
and lights to go to 244 – yellow in the north–south direction. When the light

--- Page 551 ---
timer completes its countdown, the light machine enters the RED state (00),
light becomes 4 (RED), and lights becomes 444 – red in all directions. Once
the light timer has counted down the minimum time in the all-red state, the
light FSM sets done low, signaling that it has completed the transition.
With gn and done both low, the combiner updates cur_dir to east–west
(01) and sets gn high to request the light FSM to sequence the lights green in
the east–west direction. When the light FSM has completed this action,
including timing the GREEN state, it sets done true. This in turn causes the
combiner to set ok true, signaling the master FSM that it is ready to accept a
new direction.
When ok is asserted the second time, the master FSM requests the north–
south direction again (dir = 00). This decision is driven by the car_ew line
being low or the master timer being done. This new direction causes gn to go
low, sequencing the lights to the all-red state. Then, after cur_dir has been
updated, gn is set high to sequence them back to the GREEN state. When
this is all complete, ok is asserted again.
On this third assertion of ok, signal car_lt is true, so a left-turn is
requested (dir = 10) and the lights are sequenced to red and back to green
again. When the sequencing has been completed, ok is asserted for a fourth
time. This time car_lt is still asserted, but the master timer is done, so a
north–south direction is again requested.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned, through two examples, how to factor a
complex finite-state machine into multiple, simpler machines. Factoring a
state machine takes a large, one-dimensional state space and maps it onto a
multi-dimensional state space – with one dimension for each of the
machines.
Combining common state sequences is one approach to factoring. If a
state diagram contains an identical (or nearly identical) sequence multiple
times, this sequence can be factored out. One state machine implements the
common sequence, and another state machine keeps track of which instance
of the repeated sequence is currently taking place – so control can transfer to
the proper state at the end of the sequence. Our light flasher is factored by
recognizing common sequences.

--- Page 552 ---
Layering is a another approach to factoring, in which we build a hierarchy
of machines. The top-level machine makes the top-level decisions, e.g.,
which direction should have the green light, and keeps the top-level state.
The top-level machine calls on one or more lower-level state machines to
carry out its directives, like sequencing the lights from green to red and vice
versa. The lower-level machines may call on their own servant machines –
timers, for example. Flow control may be required in order to synchronize
the operations of the different layers of machines.
Exercises
17.1Factor a state diagram, I-I. Consider the state diagram shown in
Figure 17.17.
Figure 17.17. Unfactored state diagram for Exercise 17.1. It takes in a one-bit signal m and outputs a
two-bit signal x. Edges not labeled with an input value transition automatically.
(a) Identify identical or nearly identical sequences of states in this FSM.
(b) Draw the state diagram for a separate FSM that implements these
sequences of states – inputs should select between variations in the
sequence.
(c) Draw a revised top-level state diagram that invokes your FSM from (b)
to implement the repeated sequence.
17.2Factor a state diagram, I-II. Implement your factored state machine
from Exercise 17.1 in VHDL.
17.3Factor a state diagram, II-I. Consider the state diagram shown in
Figure 17.18.

--- Page 553 ---
Figure 17.18. Unfactored state diagram for Exercise 17.3. It takes in a one-bit signal m and outputs a
one-bit signal x. Edges not labeled with an input value transition automatically.
(a) Identify identical or nearly identical sequences of states in this FSM.
(b) Draw the state diagram for a separate FSM that implements these
sequences of states – inputs should select between variations in the
sequence.
(c) Draw a revised top-level state diagram that invokes your FSM from (b)
to implement the repeated sequence.
17.4Factor a state diagram, II-II. Implement your factored state machine
from Exercise 17.3 in VHDL.
17.5Factor a state diagram, III-I. Consider the state diagram shown in
Figure 17.19.
Figure 17.19. Unfactored state diagram for Exercise 17.5. It takes in a one-bit signal m and outputs a
two-bit signal. Each state is labeled with its output value (0, 1, 2, or 3) instead of a state ID.
(a) Identify identical or nearly identical sequences of states in this FSM
that can be replaced with a timer.

--- Page 554 ---
(b) Draw a revised top-level state diagram that invokes the timer from (a).
(c) Identify identical or nearly identical sequences of states in your new
FSM.
(d) Draw the state diagram for a separate FSM that implements these
sequences of states and includes your timer.
(e) Draw a revised top-level state diagram that invokes your FSMs from
(e) to implement the repeated sequence. Your top-level should have, at
most, five states.
17.6Factor a state diagram, III-II. Implement your doubly factored state
machine from Exercise 17.5 in VHDL.
17.7Layered machine, I. Design an FSM to control an automated fork lift
in a warehouse. The warehouse has reflective lines painted on the
floor at the center of each aisle. The lines branch at each intersection.
All intersections involve aisles meeting at 90 degree angles. The
FSM has inputs far_left, left, center, right, and far_right, indicating
that a reflective line is seen to the far left, just left of center, under the
center, just right of center, or to the far right. It also has an input
meter that goes high for one cycle each time the fork lift moves one
meter. The FSM has outputs go, which causes the fork lift to move
forward, and turn_right and turn_left, which cause the fork lift to
change direction by 5 degrees in the specified direction. During each
clock cycle of your state machine, the fork lift moves forward by
about 1 cm. The sensors are spaced so that if the reflective line is
near the center of the fork lift, one of the three middle sensors will be
on. A 5 degree course error to the right will cause the fork lift to
move from the left sensor going off to the right sensor going on in
100 clocks.
The fork lift is directed to a particular location in the warehouse by a
list of instructions. There are only three types of instruction: advance
n asks the fork lift to move n meters forward following the current
reflective stripe; advance next asks the fork lift to advance to the
next intersection, and turn <direction> asks the fork lift to turn in
the specified direction (left or right) at the current intersection.
(a) Describe the layers of your fork-lift control FSM. How many layers do
you have, and what does each do?
(b) Identify the interfaces between layers. Draw a block diagram showing
these interfaces.

--- Page 555 ---
(c) Draw an FSM for each layer.
17.8Layered machine, II. Implement your fork-lift controller from
Exercise 17.7 in VHDL.
17.9Inverted combining, I. Our light flasher machine of Figure 17.2 has
the master state machine keep track of which flash (or space) we are
on and uses a slave timer to count the cycles within the flash (or
space). Factor the machine the other way, so that the master machine
counts the cycles within each flash and the slave keeps track of
which flash or space we are on.
(a) Draw a block diagram of your inverted light flasher.
(b) Draw state diagrams for the master and slave machines.
17.10Inverted combining, II. Implement your new flasher from Exercise
17.9 in VHDL.
17.11 SOS flasher, I. Modify the flasher FSM of Figure 17.2 to flash an
SOS sequence – three short flashes (one clock each), followed by
three long flashes (four clocks each), followed by three short flashes
again. Spaces within each character should be one clock long. Spaces
between characters within one SOS should be three clocks long.
Spaces between one SOS and the next SOS should be seven clocks
long. (Hint: build a character FSM and an SOS FSM.)
17.12SOS flasher, II. Implement your SOS flasher from Exercise 17.11 in
VHDL. Be sure to implement a testbench and verify your design.
17.13SOS flasher, III. Modify your SOS flasher from Exercises 17.11 and
17.12 to implement an FSM to flash the Morse code for TOSS
instead of SOS. (The code for T is a single long flash.)
17.14Modified light flasher, I. Modify the flasher FSM of Figure 17.6 to
keep the light on for five cycles if the count is odd and 15 cycles if
the count is even. You should provide a verified VHDL design entity
as your solution.
17.15Modified light flasher, II. Modify the flasher FSM of Figure 17.6 to
keep the light on with a duration equal to the current count. You
should provide a verified VHDL design entity as your solution.
17.16Walk, don’t walk flasher. Write an FSM in VHDL that controls two
lights: a walk and a don’t walk (stop) signal. Controlling the output
should be a three-bit, one-hot input value ctl. The operation of the
flasher is shown below for each possible value of ctl: 3’b001: walk –

--- Page 556 ---
off, stop – on; 3’b010: walk – off, stop – flashing (10 cycles off, 15
cycles on); 3’b100: walk – on, stop – off.
17.17Traffic-light controller, I. Modify the traffic-light controller of Figure
17.10 so that north–south and east–west have equal priority. Add an
additional input, car_ns that indicates when a car is waiting in the
north–south direction. In either the NS or EW states, change to the
other if there is a car waiting in the other direction and the master
timer is done.
17.18Traffic-light controller, II. Modify the traffic-light controller of
Figure 17.10 so that a switch from a red light to a green light is
preceded by both red and yellow being on for three clocks.
17.19Traffic-light controller, III. Modify the traffic-light controller of
Figure 17.10 to include pedestrian signals (see Exercise 17.16) in
both the north–south and east–west directions. The sequence of lights
should no longer be green, yellow, red. Instead use green-walk,
green-flash, yellow, and red. The walk signal should be on only in
green-walk. The don’t walk light should flash in green-flash, and be
on in the yellow and red states.
1 For most machines, not all points in the state space are reachable.
2 This state diagram shows only tload being active in state DONE. In fact, our timer can be loaded in
any state. The additional edges are omitted for clarity.
3 The check for tdone should be redundant since gn should not go low until done is high.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 557 ---
18
Microcode
Implementing the next-state and output logic of a finite-state machine
using a memory array gives a flexible way of realizing an FSM. The
function of the FSM can be altered by changing the contents of the
memory. We refer to the contents of the memory array as microcode, and a
machine realized in this manner is called a microcoded FSM. Each word
of the memory array determines the behavior of the machine for a
particular state and input combination, and is referred to as a
microinstruction.
We can reduce the required size of a microcode memory by augmenting
the memory with special logic to compute the next state, and by
selectively updating infrequently changing outputs. A single
microinstruction can be provided for each state, rather than one for each
state × input combination, by adding an instruction sequencer and a
branch microinstruction to cause changes in control flow. Bits of the
microinstruction can be shared by different functions by defining different
microinstruction types for control, output, and other functions.
18.1 SIMPLE MICROCODED FSM
Figure 18.1 shows a block diagram of a simple microcoded FSM. A memory
array holds the next-state and output functions. Each word of the array holds
the next state and output for a particular combination of input and current
state. The array is addressed by the concatenation of the current state and the
inputs. A pair of registers holds the current state and current output.

--- Page 558 ---
Figure 18.1. Block diagram of a simple microcoded FSM.
In practice, the memory could be realized as a RAM or EEPROM
allowing software to reprogram the microcode. Alternatively, the memory
could be a ROM. With a ROM, a new mask set is required to reprogram the
microcode. However, this is still advantageous because changing the
program of the ROM does not otherwise alter the layout of the chip. Some
ROM designs even allow the program to be changed by altering only a
single metal-level mask – reducing the cost of the change. Some designs
take a hybrid approach, putting most of the microcode into ROM (to reduce
cost) but keeping a small portion of microcode in RAM. A method is
provided to redirect an arbitrary state sequence into the RAM portion of the
microcode to allow any state to be patched using the RAM.
A VHDL description of this FSM is shown in Figure 18.2. It follows the
schematic exactly, with the addition of some logic to reset the state when rst
is asserted. The component ROM is a read-only memory that takes an address
“state & input” and returns a microinstruction uinst. The
microinstruction is then split into its next-state and output components. The
FSM of Figures 18.1 and 18.2 is very simple because it has no function until
the ROM is programmed.

--- Page 559 ---
Figure 18.2. VHDL description of a simple microcoded FSM.
To see how to program the ROM to realize a finite-state machine,
consider our simple traffic-light controller from Section 14.3. The state
diagram of this controller is repeated in Figure 18.3. To fill our microcode
ROM, we simply write down the next state and output for each current
state/input combination, as shown in Table 18.1. Consider the first line of the
table. Address 0000 corresponds to state GNS (green–north–south) with
input car_ew = 0. For this state, the output is 100001 (green–north–south,
red–east–west) and the next state is GNS (000). Thus, the content of the
ROM location 0000 is 000100001, the concatenation of the next state 000
with the output. For the second line of the table, address 0001 corresponds to
GNS with car_ew = 1. The output here is the same as for the first line, but
the next state is now YNS (001), hence the content of this ROM location is
001100001. The remaining rows of the table are derived in a similar manner.
The ROM itself is loaded with the contents of the column labeled “Data.”

--- Page 560 ---
Figure 18.3. State diagram of simple traffic-light controller.
Table 18.1. State table for simple microcoded traffic-light controller
Address State car_ew Next state Output Data
0000 GNS (000) 0 GNS (000) 100001 000100001
0001 GNS (000) 1 YNS (001) 100001 001100001
0010 YNS (001) 0 GEW (010) 010001 010010001
0011 YNS (001) 1 GEW (010) 010001 010010001
0100 GEW (010) 0 YEW (011) 001100 011001100
0101 GEW (010) 1 YEW (011) 001100 011001100
0110 YEW (011) 0 GNS (000) 001010 000001010
0111 YEW (011) 1 GNS (000) 001010 000001010
The results of simulating the microcoded FSM of Figure 18.2 using the
ROM contents from Table 18.1 are shown in Figure 18.4. The output, state,
and microcode ROM address, and microcode ROM data (microinstruction)
(the bottom four signals) are displayed in octal (base 8). The system
initializes to state 0 (GNS) with output 41 (green (4) north–south, red (1)
east– west). Then the input line (car_ew) goes high, switching the ROM
address from 00 to 01. This causes the microinstruction to switch from 041
to 141, which selects a next state of 1 (YNS) on the next clock. The machine
then proceeds through states 2 (GEW) and 3 (YEW) before returning to state
0.

--- Page 561 ---
Figure 18.4. Waveform display showing a simulation of the microcoded FSM of Figure 18.2 using the
microcode from Table 18.1.
The beauty of microcode is that we can change the function of our FSM
by changing only the contents of the ROM. Suppose, for example, that we
would like to modify the FSM so that
(1) the light stays green in the east–west direction as long as car_ew is true;
(2) the light stays green in the north–south direction for a minimum of three
cycles (states GNS1, GNS2, and GNS3);
(3) after a yellow light, the lights should go red in both directions for one
cycle before turning the new light green.
Table 18.2 shows the state table that implements these modifications. We
split state GNS into three states and add two new states (RNS and REW).
Note that the GEW state now tests car_ew and stays in GEW as long as it is
true. The results of simulating our FSM of Figure 18.2 with this new
microcode are shown in the waveform display of Figure 18.5.
Figure 18.5. Waveform display showing a simulation of the microcoded FSM of Figure 18.2 using the
microcode from Table 18.2.
Table 18.2. State table for simple microcoded traffic-light controller
Address State car_ew Next state Output Data
0000 GNS1 (000)0 GNS2 (001)100001 001100001
0001 GNS1 (000)1 GNS2 (001)100001 001100001
0010 GNS2 (001)0 GNS3 (010)100001 010100001
0011 GNS2 (001)1 GNS3 (010)100001 010100001

--- Page 562 ---
0100 GNS3 (010)0 GNS3 (010)100001 010100001
0101 GNS3 (010)1 YNS (011) 100001 011100001
0110 YNS (011) 0 RNS (100) 010001 100010001
0111 YNS (011) 1 RNS (100) 010001 100010001
1000 RNS (100)0 GEW (101) 001001 101001001
1001 RNS (100)1 GEW (101) 001001 101001001
1010 GEW (101) 0 YEW (110) 001100 110001100
1011 GEW (101) 1 GEW (101) 001100 101001100
1100 YEW (110) 0 REW (111) 001010 111001010
1101 YEW (110) 1 REW (111) 001010 111001010
1110 REW (111) 0 GNS (000)001001 000001001
1111 REW (111) 1 GNS (000)001001 000001001
18.2 INSTRUCTION SEQUENCING
A microcoded FSM can be made considerably more efficient by using a
sequencer to generate the address of the next instruction. Performing
instruction sequencing has two big advantages. First, for microinstructions
that simply proceed to the next instruction, this instruction address can be
generated with a counter, eliminating the need to store the address in the
microcode memory. Second, by using logic to select or combine the different
inputs, the microcode store can store a single microinstruction for each state,
rather than having to store separate (and nearly identical) instructions for
each possible combination of inputs.
A review of the microcode from Table 18.2 shows the redundancy that a
sequencer can eliminate. Each instruction includes an explicit next-state
field, while all instructions either select themselves or the next instruction in
sequence for the next-state. Also, all instructions are duplicated for both
input states, with only two having a small difference in the next-state field.
This overhead would be even higher if there were more than one input
signal.
Adding a sequencer to our microcoded FSM is the first step from an FSM
(where the next state is determined by a logic function) to a stored-program

--- Page 563 ---
computer, where the next instruction is determined by interpreting the
current instruction. With a sequencer, like a stored-program computer, our
microcoded machine executes microinstructions in sequence until a branch
instruction redirects execution to a new address.
Figure 18.6 shows a microcoded FSM that uses an instruction sequencer.
The state register here is replaced with a microprogram counter (μPC or
uPC) register. At any point in time, this register represents the current state
by selecting the current microinstruction. With this design we have reduced
the number of microinstructions in the microcode memory from 2s+i to 2s,
that is, from 2i per state to one per state. The cost of this reduction is
increasing the width of each microinstruction from s + o bits to s + o + b
bits. Each microinstruction consists of three fields, as shown in Figure 18.7:
an o-bit field that specifies the current output, an s-bit field that specifies the
address to branch to (the branch target), and a b-bit field that specifies a
branch instruction.
Figure 18.6. Microcoded FSM using an instruction sequencer. A multiplexer and incrementer compute
the next microinstruction address (next state) on the basis of a branch instruction and the input
conditions.
Figure 18.7. Microinstruction format for the microcoded FSM with instruction sequencer of Figure
18.6.
With the instruction sequencer, inputs are tested by the branch logic as
directed by a branch instruction from the current microinstruction. As a

--- Page 564 ---
result of this test, the sequencer either branches (by selecting the branch
target field as the next uPC) or doesn’t (by selecting uPC + 1 as the next
uPC).
Consider an example with a two-bit input field. We can define a three-bit
branch instruction, brinst, as follows:
branch <= ((brinst(0) and input(0)) or (brinst(1) and input(1)))
xor brinst(2);
Branch instruction bits 0 and 1 select whether we test input bits 0 or 1 (or
either). Branch instruction bit 2 controls the polarity of the test. If brinst[2]
is low, we branch if the selected bit(s) is high. Otherwise we branch if the
selected bit(s) is low. Using this encoding of the branch instruction, we can
perform the branchings shown in Table 18.3.
Table 18.3. Branch instruction encodings
Encoding Opcode Description
000 NOP Never branch, always proceed to uPC + 1
001 B0 Branch on input 0; if in[0],branchtobr_upc, otherwise continue to
uPC + 1
010 B1 Branch on input 1
011 BA Branch any; branch if either input is true
100 BR Always branch; select br_upc as the next uPC regardless of the
inputs
101 BN0 Branch on not input 0; if in[0] is false, branch, otherwise continue
to uPC + 1
110 BN1 Branch on not input 1
111 BNA Branch only if inputs 0 and 1 are both false
Other encodings of the branch instruction are possible. A common n-bit
encoding uses n − 1 bits to select one of 2n−1 inputs to test and the remaining
bit to select whether to branch on the selected input high or low. One of the
inputs is set always high to allow the NOP and BR instructions to be created.
For this encoding the branch signal would be as follows:
branch = brinst(n-1) xor input( to_integer(unsigned( brinst(n-2
downto 0) )) ) ;

--- Page 565 ---
The branch instructions created by this alternative encoding (for a three-bit
brinst) and three inputs are listed in Table 18.4. To provide the NOP and BR
instructions, we use a constant 1 for the fourth input. Here each branch
instruction tests exactly one input, while in the encoding of Table 18.3 the
instructions may test zero, one, or two inputs. Many other possible
encodings beyond the two presented here are possible.
Table 18.4. Alternative branch instruction encodings
Encoding Opcode Description
000 B0 Branch on input 0
001 B1 Branch on input 1
010 B2 Branch on input 2
011 BR Always branch (input 3 is the constant “1”)
100 BN0 Branch on not input 0
101 BN1 Branch on not input 1
110 BN2 Branch on not input 2
111 NOP Never branch
A VHDL description of the microcoded FSM with an instruction
sequencer is shown in Figure 18.8. The VHDL follows the block diagram of
Figure 18.6 closely. One concurrent signal assignment statement calculates
signal branch, which is true if the sequencer is to branch on the next cycle.
A second concurrent signal assignment statement then calculates the next
microprogram counter (nupc) on the basis of branch and rst. To make the
code more readable, we use a VHDL record to hold the three fields of the
microinstruction.

--- Page 566 ---
Figure 18.8. VHDL description of a microcoded FSM with an instruction sequencer.
Consider a slightly more involved version of our traffic-light controller
that includes a left-turn signal as well as north–south and east–west signals.
Table 18.5 shows the microcode. Here input 0 is car_lt and input 1 is car_ew

--- Page 567 ---
so we rename our branches BLT (branch if car_lt,BNEW (branch if not
car_ew), and so on.
Table 18.5. Microcode for traffic-light controller with sequencer of Figure 18.6
Address State Br inst Target NS LT
EW
Data
0000 NS1 BLT (001) LT1 (0101) 1000010010010101100001001
0001 NS2 BNEW
(110)
NS1 (0000) 1000010011100000100001001
0010 EW1 NOP (000) 0100010010000000010001001
0011 EW2 BEW (010) EW2 (0011) 001001100 0100011001001100
0100 EW3 BR (100) NS1 (0000) 0010010101000000001001010
0101 LT1 NOP (000) 0100010010000000010001001
0110 LT2 BLT (001) LT2 (0110) 0011000010010110001100001
0111 LT3 BR (100) NS1 (0000) 0010100011000000001010001
The microcode of Table 18.5 starts in state NS1, where the light is green
in the north–south direction. In this state the left-turn sensor is checked with
a BLT to LT1. If car_lt is true, control transfers to LT1. Otherwise the uPC
proceeds to the next state, NS2. In NS2 the microcode branches back to NS1
if car_ew is false (BNEW NS1). Otherwise, control falls through to EW1,
where the north–south light goes yellow. EW1 is always followed by EW2,
where the east–west light is green. A BEW EW2 keeps the uPC in state EW2
as long as car_ew is true. When car_ew goes false, the uPC proceeds to state
EW3, where the east–west light is yellow and a BR NS1 transfers control
back to NS1. The left-turn sequence (LT1, LT2, LT3) operates in a similar
manner.
Waveforms from a simulation of the microcoded sequencer of Figure 18.8
running the microcode of Table 18.5 are shown in Figure 18.9. The fifth row
from the top shows the microprogram counter upc. The machine is reset to
upc = 0(NS1),andadvancesto1(NS2), then back to 0 (NS1), before branching
to 5 (LT1). It proceeds from 5 (LT1) to 6 (LT2) and remains in 6 until car_lt
goes low. At that point it advances to 7 (LT3) and back to 0 (NS1). At this
point, car_ew = 1, and the sequence followed is 0, 1, 2, 3 (NS1, NS2, EW1,
EW2). The machine stays in 3 (EW2) until car_ew goes low, and then
proceeds to 4 (EW3) and back to 0 (NS1). The machine cycles between NS1

--- Page 568 ---
and NS2 a few times until both car_ew and car_lt go high at the same time.
Since the machine is in NS1 when this happens, car_lt is checked first and
the uPC is directed to LT1.
Figure 18.9. Waveform display showing a simulation of the microcoded FSM of Figure 18.8 using the
microcode from Table 18.5.
Because the microcoded FSM of Figure 18.6 can only branch one way in
each microinstruction, it takes two states (NS1 and NS2) to perform a three-
way branch among staying with north–south, going to east–west, and going
to left-turn. This results in two states with the lights green in the north–south
direction (NS1 and NS2) and two states with the lights yellow in the north–
south direction (EW1 and LT1). The real solution to this problem is to
support a multi-way branch (which we will discuss below). However, we can
partially solve the problem in software by using the alternative microcode
shown in Table 18.6.
Table 18.6. Alternative microcode for traffic-light controller with sequencer of Figure 18.6
Address State Br inst Target NS LT
EW
Data
0000 NS1 BNA (111) NS1 (0000) 1000010011110000100001001
0001 NS2 BLT (001) LT1 (0100) 0100010010010100010001001
0010 EW1 BEW
(010)
EW1 (0010) 001001100 0100010001001100
0011 EW2 BR (100) NS1 (0000) 0010010101000000001001010
0100 LT1 BLT (001) LT1 (0100) 0011000010010100001100001
0101 LT2 BR (100) NS1 (0000) 0010100011000000001010001
In the alternative microcode of Table 18.6, the uPC stays in state NS1 as
long as car_ew and car_lt are both false by using a BNA NS1 (branch on not
any inputs to NS1); NS1 is now the only state with the lights green in the

--- Page 569 ---
north–south direction. If any inputs are true, the uPC proceeds to state NS2,
which is the single state with the lights yellow in the north–south direction.
State NS2 tests the car_lt input and branches to state LT1 if true (BLT LT1).
If car_lt is false, the uPC proceeds to EW1. The remainder of the machine is
similar to that of Table 18.5, except that the EW and LT states have been
renumbered.
Simulation waveforms for this alternative microcode are shown in Figure
18.10.
Figure 18.10. Waveform display showing a simulation of the microcoded FSM of Figure 18.8 using
the microcode from Table 18.6.
18.3 MULTI-WAY BRANCHES
As we saw in Section 18.2, using an instruction sequencer greatly reduces
the size of our microcode memory, but at the expense of restricting each
state to have at most two next states (upc+1 and br_upc). This restriction can
be a problem if we have an FSM that has a large number of exits from a
particular state. For example, in a microcoded processor, it is typical to
branch to one of tens to hundreds of next states on the basis of the opcode of
the current instruction. Another multi-way branch is then needed on the
addressing mode of the instruction. Implementing such a multi-way dispatch
using the sequencer of Section 18.2 would result in very poor efficiency
because n cycles would be required in order to test for n different opcodes.
We can overcome this limitation of two-way branches by using an
instruction sequencer that supports multi-way branches, as shown in Figure
18.11. This sequencer is similar to that of Figure 18.6 except that the branch
target, br_upc, is generated from the branch instruction, brinst, and inputs
rather than being provided directly from the microinstruction. With this

--- Page 570 ---
approach, we can branch to up to 2i next states (one for each input
combination) from each state.
Figure 18.11. Microcoded FSM with an instruction sequencer that supports multi-way branches.
The branch instruction encodes not just the condition to test, but also how
to determine the branch target. Table 18.7 shows one possible method of
encoding multi-way branch instructions. The BRx and BRNx instructions
are two-way branch instructions identical to those specified in Table 18.4.
The BR4 instruction is a four-way branch that selects one of four adjacent
states (from br_upc to br_upc+3), depending on the input.
Table 18.7. Branch instructions for microcoded FSM supporting multi-way branches
Encoding Opcode Description
BRx 00xx Branch on condition x (as in Table 18.4, includes BR)
BRNx 01xx Branch on not condition x (as in Table 18.4, includes NOP)
BR4 1000 Branch four ways; nupc = br_upc + in
To use the BR4 instruction requires some care in mapping states to
microinstruction addresses, and may require that some states are duplicated.
Consider, for example, the state diagram of Figure 18.12. A mapping of this
state diagram to microcode addresses for a machine with a four-way branch
instruction that adds the input to the branch target is shown in Table 18.8.
The four-way branch from X targets address 000, so we must lay out branch
targets A1, B1, C1, and X in locations 000, 001, 010, and 011, respectively.
In a similar manner, we locate states so that the four-way branch from C1
targets address 100. Thus we must place states C2, C3, X, and C1 at
locations 100, 101, 110, and 111, respectively. To make this work, we need

--- Page 571 ---
two copies of X, one at 011 and one at 110, and two copies of C1 (at 010 and
111). When we duplicate a state in this manner, we simply arrange for the
two copies (e.g., X and X′)tohave identical behavior.
Figure 18.12. State diagram with two four-way branches.
Table 18.8. Mapping of state diagram of Figure 18.12 onto microcode addresses
States X and C1 are duplicated because they each appear in two four-way
branches.
Address State Branch instruction Branch target
000 A1 BR A2
001 B1 BR C2
010 C1 BR4 C2
011 X BR4 A1
100 C2 BR X
101 C3 BR X
110 X′ BR4 A1
111 C1′ BR4 C2
18.4 MULTIPLE INSTRUCTION TYPES

--- Page 572 ---
So far we have considered microcoded FSMs that update all output bits in
every microinstruction. In general, most FSMs need to update only a subset
of the outputs in a given state. Our traffic-light controller FSMs, for
example, change at most one light on each state change. We can save bits of
the microinstruction by modifying our FSM to update only a single output
register in any given state. We waste other microinstruction bits by
specifying a branch instruction and branch target in each microinstruction,
even though many microinstructions always proceed to the next state and
don’t branch. We can save these redundant branch bits by only branching in
some instructions and updating outputs in other instructions.
Figure 18.13 shows the instruction formats for a microcoded FSM with
two microinstruction types: a branch instruction and a store (output)
instruction. Each microinstruction is one or the other. A branch instruction,
identified by a 1 in the leftmost bit, specifies a branch condition and a
branch target. When the FSM encounters a branch microinstruction, it
branches (or doesn’t) as specified by the condition and target. No outputs are
updated. A store instruction, identified by a 0 in the leftmost bit, specifies an
output register and a value. When the FSM encounters a store
microinstruction, it stores the value to the specified output register and then
proceeds to the next microinstruction, in sequence. No branching takes place
with a store instruction.
Figure 18.13. Instruction formats for a microcoded FSM with separate output and branch instructions.
Figure 18.14 shows a block diagram of a microcoded FSM that supports
the two instruction types of Figure 18.13. Each microinstruction is split into
an x-bit instruction field and an s-bit value field. The instruction field holds
the operation-code (opcode) bit (the leftmost bit that distinguishes between
branch and store) and either the condition (for a branch) or the destination
(for a store). The value field holds either the branch target (for a branch) or
the new output value (for a store).

--- Page 573 ---
Figure 18.14. Block diagram of a microcoded FSM with output instructions. For our traffic-light
controller, we replace the last output register with a timer and feed its done signal into the branch
logic.
The instruction sequencer of Figure 18.14 is identical to that of Figure
18.6 except that the branch logic always selects the next microinstruction,
uPC+ 1, when the current microinstruction is a store instruction.1 The major
difference is with the output logic. Here a decoder enables at most one
output register to receive the value field on a store instruction.
A VHDL description for the microcode engine with two instruction types
of Figure 18.14 is shown in Figures 18.15 and 18.16. Here the
microinstruction is a VHDL record that contains an opcode (0 = store, 1 =
branch), an instruction (destination for store, condition for branch), and a
value. For a store, the destination is decoded into a one-hot enable vector, e,
that is used to enable the value to be stored in one of the three output
registers (NS = 0, EW = 1, LT = 2) or to load the timer (destination = 3). The
enable is fed to an enable input to component vDFFE, which is described in
Figure 18.17. For a branch, inst(2) determines the polarity of the branch,
and the low two bits, inst(1 downto 0), determine the condition to be
tested (LT = 0, EW = 1, Lt|EW = 2, timer = 3).

--- Page 575 ---
Figure 18.15. VHDL description of a microcoded FSM with two instruction types.
Figure 18.16. VHDL description of a microcoded FSM with two instruction types.
Figure 18.17. VHDL for flip-flop with enable.

--- Page 576 ---
Table 18.9 shows the microcode for a more sophisticated traffic-light
controller programmed on the microcode engine of Figure 18.15. The first
three states load the three output registers with RED in the east–west and
left-turn registers and GREEN in the north–south register. Next states NS1
and NS2 wait for eight cycles by loading the timer and waiting for it to
signal done. State NS4 then waits for either input. The north–south light is
set to YELLOW in NS5; NS6 and NS7 then set the timer and wait for it to
be done before advancing to NS8, where the north–south light is set to RED.
If the left-turn input is true, NS9 branches to LT1 to sequence the left-turn
light. Otherwise the east–west lights are sequenced in states EW1–EW9.
Waveforms generated by a simulation of this microcode are shown in Figure
18.18.
Figure 18.18. Waveform display showing a simulation of the microcoded FSM of Figures 18.15 and
18.16 using the microcode from Table 18.9.
Table 18.9. Microcode to implement traffic-light controller on FSM with two instruction types
Address State Instruction Value Data
00000 RST1 SLT (0010) RED 001 001000001
00001 RST2 SEW (0001) RED 001 000100001
00010 NS1 SNS (0000) GREEN 100 000000100
00011 NS2 STIM (0011) TGRN 01000 001101000
00100 NS3 BNTD (1111) NS3 00100 111100100
00101 NS4 BNLE (1110) NS4 00101 111000101
00110 NS5 SNS (0000) YELLOW 010 000000010
00111 NS6 STIM (0011) TYEL 00011 001100011
01000 NS7 BNTD (1111) NS7 01000 111101000

--- Page 577 ---
01001 NS8 SNS (0000) RED 001 000000001
01010 NS9 BLT (1000) LT1 10100 100010100
01011 EW1 STIM (0011) TRED 00010 001100010
01100 EW2 BNTD (1111) EW2 01100 111101100
01101 EW3 SEW (0001) GREEN 100 000100100
01110 EW4 STIM (0011) TGRN 01000 001101000
01111 EW5 BNTD (1111) EW5 01111 111101111
10000 EW6 SEW (0001) YELLOW 010 000100010
10001 EW7 STIM (0011) TYEL 00011 001100011
10010 EW8 BNTD (1111) EW8 10010 111110010
10011 EW9 BTD (1011) RST2 00001 101100001
10100 LT1 STIM (0011) TRED 00010 001100010
10101 LT2 BNTD (1111) LT2 10101 111110101
10110 LT3 SLT (0010) GREEN 100 001000100
10111 LT4 STIM (0011) TGRN 01000 001101000
11000 LT5 BNTD (1111) LT5 11000 111111000
11001 LT6 SLT (0010) YELLOW 010 001000010
11010 LT7 STIM (0011) TYEL 00011 001100011
11011 LT8 BNTD (1111) LT8 10010 111111011
11100 LT9 BTD (1011) RST1 00000 101100000
18.5 MICROCODE SUBROUTINES
The state sequences in Table 18.9 are very repetitive. The NS, EW, and LT
sequences perform largely the same actions. The only salient difference is
the output register being written. Just as we shared common state sequences
by factoring FSMs in Chapter 17, we can share common state sequences in a
microcoded FSM by supporting subroutines. A subroutine is a sequence of
instructions that can be called from several different points, and, after
exiting, returns control to the point from which it was called.

--- Page 578 ---
Figure 18.19 shows the block diagram of a microcode engine that supports
one level of subroutines. This machine is identical to that of Figure 18.14
except for two differences: (a) a return uPC register, rupc, and associated
logic have been added to the sequencer, and (b) a select register and
associated logic have been added to the output section.
Figure 18.19. Microcoded FSM with support for one level of subroutines.
The rupc register is used to hold the upc to which a subroutine should
branch when it completes. When a subroutine is called, the branch target is
selected as the next upc, and upc+1, the address of the next instruction in
sequence, is saved in the rupc register. A special branch instruction CALL is
used to cause the enable line to the rupc register, erpc, tobeasserted. When
the subroutine is complete, it returns control to the saved location using
another special branch instruction RET to select the rupc as the source of the
next upc.
The select register is used to allow the same state sequence to write to
different output registers when called from different places. A two-bit
register identifier (NS = 0, EW = 1, LT = 2) can be stored in the select
register. A special store instruction SSEL can then be used to store to the
register specified by the select register (rather than by the destination bits of
the instruction). Thus, the main program can store 0 (NS) into the select
register and then call a subroutine to sequence the north–south lights on and
off. The program can then store 1 (EW) into the select register and call the
same subroutine to sequence the east–west lights on and off. The same

--- Page 579 ---
subroutine can sequence different lights because it performs all of its output
using the SSEL instruction.
18.6 SIMPLE COMPUTER
In this chapter, we started with a simple microcoded FSM and built up to a
system with branch instructions and multiple output registers. This section
continues the progression by implementing a simple processor. This design
is intended to demystify processors – by showing how simple they actually
are. This design is not intended to be an example of what a processor should
be. It has been optimized for simplicity, not performance, efficiency, or ease
of programming.
The processor supports three main categories of instructions: branches,
moves, and arithmetic. Regardless of type, instructions are of a fixed one-
byte size. The upper four bits, i(7 downto 4), indicate the opcode of
instruction. The interpretations of the lower four bits are opcode-dependent.
We summarize the 16 different instructions in Table 18.10.
Table 18.10. List of opcodes used in the processor
Opcodes with a leading 1 are computed in the ALU. The lower four bits of
the instruction encode RS for ALU instructions and LDA. For specific
instructions, they can signify a branch condition (BR.ACC), immediate
(BR.IMI, LDA.I), or destination (STA).
Opcode i(7 downto 4)InstructionDescription
0000 BR Branch to PC stored in BRD
0001 BR.S Branch to PC stored in BRD, store PC+ 1intoBRD
0010 BR.IM Branch based on the inputs and branch instruction
currently stored in IM; the destination is BRD
0011 BR.IMI Same as BRIM, except destination is PC+ i(3 downto 0)
0100 BR.ACC Branch to address in BR register if ACC meets
condition stored in bits (4 downto 3) (00: equal 0, 01:
not equal 0; 10: greater than 0; 11: less than 0)
0101 LDA ACC = RS (i(3 downto 0))
0110 LDA.I ACC = i(3 downto 0)

--- Page 580 ---
0111 STA RD (i(3 downto 0)) = ACC
1000 ADD ACC = ACC + RS(i(3 downto 0))
1001 SUB ACC = ACC − RS
1010 MUL {ACC.H, ACC} = ACC∗RS
1011 SH {ACC.H, ACC} = {16’d0, ACC}<<RS ⊕
1100 XOR ACC = ACC RS
1101 AND ACC = ACC ∧  RS
1110 OR ACC = ACC ∨  RS
1111 NOT ACC = ACC
Instead of storing branch targets in our instruction ROM, they are stored
in a branch destination register, BRD. The next PC after a BR instruction is
equal to the value of BRD. To enable more efficient calling of subroutines,
the BR.S instruction stores PC + 1 into BRD. The BR.IM instruction
branches according to the eight inputs and timer done signal, using the ten-
bit branch instruction stored in register IM. The branch instructions work the
same as in Table 18.3, except that there are nine input signals (eight inputs
and timer) instead of two. Instruction BR.IMI also uses the IM register, but
the destination is PC + i(3 downto 0). Finally, the BR.ACC instruction
branches according to the accumulator register (ACC). Bits 3 and 2 of the
instruction indicate the branch condition.
Table 18.11 lists our processor’s registers, many of which have unique
functionality. The outputs of our system are four 16-bit registers: O0 through
O3. The temporary registers (T0–T2) are used to store intermediate values.
The PC holds the current program counter and is read-only for all non-
branch instructions (used as RS). We also include support for a timer that is
loaded when written. The eight input bits appear as a read-only register. The
accumulator is broken into 16-bit high and low registers. Only the multiply
and shift instructions write the high bits.
Table 18.11. The state that is kept in our processor
Not shown is the instruction ROM (accessed with the PC) and data RAM.
The data RAM is accessed with address MA whenever MD is used as a
source or destination operand.
ID Register Length (b) Description

--- Page 581 ---
0000 ACC 16 The implicit destination of all arithmetic operations
0001 ACC.H 16 Upper 16 bits of the accumulator
0010 O0 16 Register connected to output
0011 O1 16 Register connected to output
0100 O2 16 Register connected to output
0101 O3 16 Register connected to output
0110 BRD 16 Branch target register
0111 MA 16 Memory address
1000 MD X Memory source register
1001 IM 10 Branch instruction register
1010 T0 16 Temporary register 0
1011 T1 16 Temporary register 1
1100 T2 16 Temporary register 2
1101 IN 8 Input values, read-only
1110 PC 16 The current program counter, read-only
1111 timer 16 Timer, write-only; loads a new start time when used as a
destination
The processor includes an arithmetic-logic unit (ALU). Given an opcode
and two inputs, the ALU performs the specified operation and outputs the
result. Structurally, the ALU computes the eight different operations and
uses an eight-input multiplexer to select the output. It resembles the
universal shifter/counter ofSection 16.2.3 without the internal state. The
VHDL for the ALU is shown in Figure 18.20. The output function is selected
by a case statement, and we instantiate only one adder/subtractor.

--- Page 583 ---
Figure 18.20. VHDL for our simple ALU. Only shift and multiply write the upper accumulator bits.
A data RAM (see Section 8.9) is accessed via the MD and MA registers.
When MD is used as a source for any LD or ALU instruction, the value
stored in address MA of the RAM is loaded. When MD is the destination for
an STA instruction, the value in ACC is placed into memory address MA.
The VHDL for our processor design entity is shown in Figures 18.21 to
18.23. The first section of the code (Figure 18.21) loads and does some
initial parsing of the current instruction from the instruction ROM. In the
second and third parts (Figures 18.22 and 18.23), the code selects the correct
source register from the 16 options using a case statement, and calculates
branching conditions and the next program counter. The enable signals, en,
are used to write the correct register. The VHDL concludes with all the state
registers, including the timer and PC.

--- Page 585 ---
Figure 18.21. VHDL of processor, part 1 of 3. This part of the design entity reads the instruction
ROM with address pc and parses the instruction, i.
Figure 18.22. VHDL of processor, part 2 of 3. The top of this code finds the correct source register
using a case statement, and then computes the branching conditions and destination.

--- Page 587 ---
Figure 18.23. VHDL of processor, part 3 of 3. This code assigns the next values for the accumulator
register and the enable signals, en, for our architected state, assigns the enable signals, and instantiates
the registers.
Our simple processor executes a software program stored in ROM. For
example, a program for calculating Fibonacci numbers is shown in Figure
18.24. Waveforms resulting from executing this program are shown in
Figure 18.25. The code initializes the state by loading several constants into
registers as well as reading the input to determine how many numbers to
compute. The loop, beginning at PC = 9, computes the next number and
transfers it into O0. The loop index, O1, is decremented, and a branch to the
loop start is taken if the index does not equal 0.
Figure 18.24. Code for computing Fibonacci numbers on our simple processor.
Figure 18.25. The Fibonacci code from Figure 18.24 running on our processor. Register O0 shows the
current Fibonacci number and register O1 is the remaining number of iterations in the program. We

--- Page 588 ---
also show the temporary values stored in T0, T1, and T2.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned the powerful technique of stored-program
control and how to implement finite-state machines using microcode.
Any finite-state machine can be implemented using a table in memory
(ROM or RAM) to store the next-state and output functions. A concatenation
of all input signals and the current state is used as the memory address. The
memory output gives the next state and current output. This technique, while
general, requires a memory with S2i words, where S is the number of states
and i is the number of input signal bits.
By adding a sequencer to generate the next-state memory address, we can
reduce the size of the required memory to S words. The sequencer
implements a family of branch instructions that select either the next state in
sequence or a branch target, specified by the current microcode word,
depending on the value of the input bits. Multi-way branches can be
performed by modifying the branch target address on the basis of the input
conditions.
If only a subset of the outputs changes on each state transition, we can
further reduce our memory requirements by defining store instructions. With
this organization, the output of the microcode machine is held in a set of
registers. Each store microinstruction updates the state of one output register.
The other registers hold their previous states.
If our microcode has repeated sequences, we can reduce the size of our
code by extending our branch instructions to include subroutine call and
return instructions. The CALL instruction saves the address of the
instruction following the call in a special rupc register. After the common
sequence has been executed, the RET instruction jumps to the address in the
rupc.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Microcode was originated by Maurice Wilkes at Cambridge University in
1951 to implement the control logic for the EDSAC computer [113]. It has
been widely used since that time in many different types of digital systems.
Microcode became very popular in the late 1970s for implementing

--- Page 589 ---
processors with bipolar bit-slice chip sets [81]. Microcode is still widely
used today to implement complex instruction sets such as x86 [44]. The
approach taken to generate the microcode for the Motorola 680000 (the
processor used in the original Apple Macintosh) is described in ref. [107].
Two of the most popular books about processor design are Patterson and
Hennessy’s introductory [93] and more advanced [48] texts. For another
example of a relatively simple processor, O’Brien’s The Apollo Guidance
Computer [90] overviews the computer that went to the Moon.
Exercises
18.1Modified traffic-light controller, I. Modify the traffic controller
microcode of Table 18.1 (for the controller shown in Figure 18.1) by
adding an additional input car_ns. Nowa traffic light in any direction
stays green until the input signaling a car traveling in the opposite
direction goes high. This happens regardless of whether any cars
remain in the green direction. Be sure to include yellow lights in any
transition from green in one direction to another.
18.2Modified traffic-light controller, II. Using the microcoded FSM of
Figure 18.2, simulate your microcode from Exercise 18.1. Be sure to
instantiate a version of the FSM with enough inputs, outputs, and bits
of state.
18.3Modified traffic-light controller, III. How many bits in your code
from Exercise 18.1 must you change in order for a light to change
direction only when no cars are coming in the current direction and
there is a car in the opposite direction?
18.4Microcoded vending machine. Implement the control path of the
vending machine ofSection 16.3.1 using the microcoded controller
with the instruction sequencer of Section 18.2. What are the inputs
and outputs of the machine? How large a control store is required?
Show the microcode for this implementation. Assume that each
external input to the controller is held high until the FSM pulses a nxt
output signal.
18.5Microcoded combination lock. Implement the control of the
combination lock of Section 16.3.2 using the microcoded controller
and sequencer of Section 18.2. What are the inputs and outputs of the

--- Page 590 ---
machine? How large a control store is required? Show the microcode
for this implementation.
18.6SOS flasher, I. Write the microcode for an SOS flasher (Exercise
17.11). While the input flash is high, your system should flash an
SOS sequence – three short flashes (one clock each) followed by
three long flashes (four clocks each) followed by three short flashes
again. Spaces within each character should be one clock long. Spaces
between characters within one SOS should be three clocks long.
Spaces between one SOS and the next SOS should be seven clocks
long. When the input is lowered, the flasher should reset back to a
reset state. Use the microcoded FSM of Section 18.1. Leave your
flasher completely unfactored.
18.7SOS flasher, II. Modify the microcoded FSM and microcode from
Section 18.1 and Exercise 18.6 to act as a control module to interface
with a datapath of your design. Provide a block diagram of this
datapath, the signals needed to interface between the two, and your
microcode.
18.8SOS flasher, III. Write and verify the VHDL for the SOS flasher
(datapath + microcoded FSM) of Exercise 18.7.
18.9SOS flasher, IV. Write the microcode for the SOS flasher of Exercise
18.7 using the sequenced microcoded FSM of Section 18.2 instead of
the FSM of Section 18.1.
18.10SOS flasher, V. Write the microcode for the SOS flasher of Exercise
18.7 using the microcoded FSM with subroutines from Section 18.5.
Each character in your system should be a separate subroutine.
18.11 String comparison, I. This exercise and Exercises 18.12–18.14 deal
with building a microcoded state machine to perform an ASCII string
comparison. The initial block diagram is shown in Figure 18.26(a).
Timing is shown in Figure 18.26(b). A string comparison is started by
asserting the input signal start. After comparing against the entire
string, if we find a matching string, the match output is asserted until
start again pulses. If the string termination character arrives (end =
1), thefail signal should be asserted until restart. The microcode
machine asserts c_nxt to request each new character from the input.
The ROM provides signal s_c to the input block to match against the
current character. The input logic block outputs three signals: start,
end (c = 8’b0), and match (c = s_c).

--- Page 591 ---
Figure 18.26. Microcode block (a) and waveform (b) of a basic string comparison engine. The input
character c is matched against a string “ABC.” If it matches, the match output will be asserted. If the
string terminates ’/0’, a failure output is asserted.
(a) If the match sequence is “11ABC,” draw the state diagram.
(b) Draw the microcode table without a sequencer (see Table 18.1). For
each state and input combination, indicate the values for next, n_m, n_
f, s_c, and c_nxt.
(c) Write the VHDL for this FSM.
18.12String comparison, II. Repeat Exercise 18.11 for the string
“FLIPFLOP” (consider all transitions from the second L).

--- Page 592 ---
18.13String comparison, III. Add a sequencer to the string comparator of
Exercise 18.12. You may define your own branch instructions.
(a) Redraw the block diagram of Figure 18.26(a) to include the sequencer.
(b) Define and list the branch instructions that you will use to sequence
your states.
(c) Write the ROM tables (see Table 18.5) for matching “ABC” and
“FLIPFLOP.”
(d) Update the VHDL to include this sequencer.
18.14String comparison, IV. Modify the sequencer to include a counter that
indicates in position in the string of the character currently being
matched. Update both the block diagram and VHDL to implement the
counter.
18.15Microcode controller with call/return. Write and verify the VHDL for
a controller that supports call/return instructions.
18.16Multi-level call/return. Describe a controller that is able to make calls
and returns up to three levels deep. This allows subroutines to call
subroutines (that call subroutines).
18.17Programming, I. For the simple processor of Section 18.6, write a
program to put the ASCII characters “HELLO WORLD” on output
register O1.2 The number of cycles spent displaying each character
does not matter, just that the sequence of values on O1 spells out
“HELLO WORLD.”
18.18Programming, II. Assemble – convert to a series of binary
instructions – your code from Exercise 18.17. Run it using the VHDL
processor we have provided.
18.19Programming, III. Write a program for the processor of Section 18.6
that averages the first 32 values stored in memory (addresses 0–31).
Output the result on register O1.
1 One can just as easily add multiple instruction types and output registers to an FSM that supports
multi-way branches (Figure 18.11).
2 In ASCII, the word “HELLO” (with the trailing space) corresponds to the hex values 0x48, 0x45,
0x4C, 0x4C, 0x4F, 0x20.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 593 ---
19
Sequential examples
This chapter gives some additional examples of sequential circuits. We
start with a simple FSM that reduces the number of 1s on its input by a
factor of 3 to review how to draw a state diagram from a specification and
how to implement a simple FSM in VHDL. We then implement an SOS
detector to review factoring of state machines. Next, we revisit our tic-tac-
toe game from Section 9.4 and build a datapath sequential circuit that
plays a game against itself using the combinational move generator we
previously developed. We illustrate the use of table-driven sequential
circuits and composing circuits from sequential building blocks like
counters and shift registers by building a Huffman encoder and decoder.
The encoder uses table lookup along with a counter and shift register,
while the decoder traverses a tree data structure stored in a table.
19.1 DIVIDE-BY-3 COUNTER
In this section we will design a finite-state machine that outputs a high signal
on the output for one cycle for each three cycles the input has been high.
More specifically, our FSM has a single input called input and a single
output called output. Wheninput is detected high for the third cycle (and
sixth, ninth, etc.), output will go high for exactly one cycle. This FSM
divides the number of pulses on the input by 3. It does not divide the binary
number represented by the input by 3.
A state diagram for this machine is shown in Figure 19.1. At first it may
seem that we can implement this machine with three states; however, four
are required. We need states A to D to distinguish having seen the input high

--- Page 594 ---
for zero, one, two, or three cycles so far. The machine resets to state A. It sits
in this state until the input is high on a rising clock edge, at which time it
advances to state B. The second high input takes the machine to C, and the
third high input takes the machine to D, where the output goes high for one
cycle. We can’t simply have this third high input take us back to A because
we need to distinguish having seen three cycles of high input – in which case
the output goes high – from having seen zero cycles of high input.1
Figure 19.1. State diagram for a divide-by-3 counter FSM. The four states represent having seen the
input high for zero, one, two, and three cycles so far.
The FSM always exits state D after one cycle. The input during this cycle
determines the next state. If the input is low, the machine advances to state A
to wait for three more high inputs before the next output. If the input is high,
this counts as one of the three high inputs, so the machine advances to state
B to wait for two more.
A VHDL description of this divide-by-3 FSM is shown in Figure 19.2. A
case statement is used to implement the next-state function, including reset.
A single concurrent signal assignment statement implements the output
function, making the output high in state D. The constant declarations used
to define the states and their width are not shown. Waveforms from
simulating this VHDL model are shown in Figure 19.3.

--- Page 595 ---
Figure 19.2. VHDL description of the divide-by-3 counter.

--- Page 597 ---
Figure 19.3. Waveforms from simulating the divide-by-3 counter.
19.2 SOS DETECTOR
Morse code, once widely used for telegraph and radio communication,
encodes the alphabet, numbers, and a few punctuation marks into an on/off
signal as patterns of dots and dashes. Spaces are used to separate symbols. A
dot is a short period of on, adash is a long period of on. Dots and dashes
within a symbol are separated by short periods of off, and a space is a long
period of off. The universal distress code, SOS, in Morse code is three dots
(S), a space, three dashes (O), a space, and three dots again (the second S).
Consider the task of building a finite-state machine to detect when an SOS
is received on the input. We assume that a dot is represented by the input
being high for exactly one cycle, a dash is represented by the input being
high for exactly three cycles, dots and dashes within a symbol are separated
by the input being low for exactly one cycle, and that a space is represented
by the input being low for three or more cycles. Note that the input going
either high or low for exactly two cycles is an illegal condition. With this set
of definitions, one legal SOS string is 101010001110111011100010101000.
We can build an SOS detector as a single, flat state machine as shown
with the state diagram of Figure 19.4. The FSM resets to state R. States S11
to S18 detect the first “S” and the associated space. States O1 to O11 detect
the “O,” and states O12 to O14 detect the space following the “O.” Finally
states S21 to S28 detect the second “S” and the subsequent space. State 28
outputs a “1” to indicate that SOS has been detected.

--- Page 598 ---
Figure 19.4. State diagram for an SOS detector realized as a single, flat FSM. The square boxes
indicate connections.
For clarity, many transitions are omitted from Figure 19.4. The transitions
along the horizontal path from state R through state S28 represent the
transitions that occur when an SOS is detected. If at any point along this path
a 1 is detected when a 0 is expected, the machine transitions to state E1.
Similarly, if a 0 is detected when we expect a 1, the machine transitions to
state E2. These transitions are shown for the first row (via boxes E and E1)
and then omitted to avoid cluttering the figure. States E1 to E3 are error-
handling states that wait for a space after an error condition and then restart
the detection.
The transition from O1 to S12 handles the case where the input includes
the string SSOS. After detecting the first S, we are expecting an O but
instead receive a second S. If we were to transition to state E2 on receiving a
0 in O1, we would miss this second S and hence the SOS. Instead we must
recognize the dot and go to state S12.
The transition from S28 to S11 (via the box labeled D) is needed in order
to allow back-to-back SOSs with minimum-sized spaces to be detected.
After detecting SOS, including the subsequent space, in state S28, the next 1

--- Page 599 ---
may be the first dot of the next SOS, and must be recognized by going to
state S11.
While the flat FSM of Figure 19.4 works, it is not a very good solution for
a number of reasons. First, it is not modular. If we were to change the
definition of a dot to be the input going high for one or two cycles, the flat
machine would need to be changed in eight places (every place a dot is
recognized). Similar global changes would be needed to accommodate a
change to the definition of a dash or a space. Also, the machine would need
to be completely reworked if the sequence we are detecting is different than
SOS, say ABC. Second, the machine is large, 34 states, and would become
even larger with more flexible definitions of dots and dashes. Finally, some
aspects of the machine, like the transition from O1 to S12, are subtle.
The SOS machine is a perfect candidate for factoring. We can build FSMs
to detect dots, dashes, and spaces, and then use the outputs of these FSMs to
build FSMs that detect S and O. Finally, a simple top-level FSM detects
SOS. A block diagram for a factored version of our SOS-detection FSM is
shown in Figure 19.5. The input bit stream (sequence) is input to three
element-detecting FSMs – Dot, Dash, and Space. Each of these FSMs has
two outputs: one that indicates when the element has been detected, and one
that indicates that the current input sequence could be part of that element.
For example, the Dot FSM outputs isDot when a dot is detected and cbDot
when the current sequence could be a dot, but needs additional input before
deciding.
Figure 19.5. Block diagram of a factored SOS detector. The first rank of FSMs detects dots, dashes,
and spaces. The second rank detects Ss and Os. The final SOS FSM detects the sequence SOS. Each
sub-machine has two outputs: one indicates when the desired symbol has been detected (e.g., isS). The
other indicates when the current sequence could be a prefix of the desired symbol (e.g., cbS).

--- Page 600 ---
The six signals out of the three element detectors feed a pair of character
detectors, one each for S and O. Like the element detectors, each character
detector also has an is and a could be output. The four signals out of the two
character detectors are input to a top-level SOS FSM that indicates when
SOS is detected.
Figure 19.6 shows the three FSMs that detect the elements Dot, Dash, and
Space. The Dot FSM resets to state 0. Upon detecting a 1 on the input, it
indicates that the current sequence could be a dot by asserting output cb and
transitions to state Dot. In state Dot, a 0 on the input results in a dot being
detected with the is output asserted and returns the machine to state 0. Note
that when the is output is asserted, the cb output is also asserted. If a 1 is
detected in state Dot, the machine goes to state 1 to wait for a zero. The
Dash and Space machines operate in a similar manner.
Figure 19.6. Element finite-state machines. (a) Dot, (b) Dash, and (c) Space. Each outputs when the
current sequence could be (cb) the respective element and when the element has been detected (is).
The character FSM for the character S is shown in Figure 19.7. The
machine resets to state OTH (other), which is also the target of the default

--- Page 601 ---
(def) transition, which covers unexpected inputs. Upon detecting a space, the
machine enters state SPC. Detecting the first dot moves the machine to state
D1, and subsequent dots move the machine to states D2 and D3. Detecting a
space in state D3 returns the machine to state SPC and asserts is to signal
that an S has been detected.
Figure 19.7. State diagram for S-detecting FSM.
If, at any point during the sequence from SPC through D1, D2, and D3
and back to SPC, the input could not be the element being waited for (e.g., if
cbDot is false in state D1), then the machine returns to state OTH. This is
why we need the could-be outputs on the element detectors. They allow us to
detect illegal elements between the elements we are looking for. Consider,
for example, the input sequence 00010110101000. The machine detects the
space 000, and the first dot 10, but then returns to state OTH on the illegal
element 110 because cbDot falls when the second 1 is detected. If we just
wait for isDot, we would erroneously determine that this sequence is an S
because it has three dots. Without monitoring cbDot we would not see that
the three dots are not contiguous, and hence not an S.
The main SOS-detecting FSM, shown in Figure 19.8, contains only three
states. It waits in state ST (start) until an S is detected, when it moves to state
S1. From state S1, if an O is detected it moves to state O. However, if at any
point in S1 input cbO goes false, indicating an illegal sequence between the
S and the O, the machine returns to ST. If the machine detects a second S
while in state O, it asserts its is output, detecting an SOS, and returns to ST.
If input cbS goes false while in state O, detecting an illegal sequence
between the O and the S, the machine returns to ST without detecting SOS.

--- Page 602 ---
Figure 19.8. State diagram of main SOS-detecting FSM.
Waveforms showing the operation of the factored SOS detector are shown
in Figure 19.9. The waveforms show two good SOS detections with one
SOT (T is a single dash) between them. Note the cb and is waveforms for
each element, for the characters S and O, and for SOS itself. On the second 1
of the T’s dash, cbDot falls, causing cbS and cbSOS to fall in turn
(combinationally).

--- Page 603 ---
Figure 19.9. Waveforms showing operation of factored SOS detector.

--- Page 604 ---
Factoring the SOS detector gives us a much simpler system that is far
easier to modify and maintain. Instead of 34 states in one brittle, monolithic
state machine, we have a total of 20 states divided over six small, simple
FSMs. The largest single FSM in the factored machine has a total of five
states. Should we modify our specification to change the definition of a dot
to be one or two 1s in a row, we would make one simple change to the Dot
FSM.2
19.3 TIC-TAC-TOE GAME
In Section 9.4 we designed a combinational module that generated moves for
the game of tic-tac-toe. In this section we will use this module as a
component in a sequential system that plays a game of tic-tac-toe against
itself.
A block diagram of the system is shown in Figure 19.10. The state in the
system resides in the three registers on the left side of the figure. The nine-
bit Xreg and Oreg hold bit maps that reflect the current positions of Xs and
Os, respectively. The one-bit xplays register is true if X plays next and false
if O plays next. Reset is not shown in the figure. Xreg and Oreg reset to all
zeros; xplays resets to true.
Figure 19.10. Block diagram of a tic-tac-toe playing system using the move generation module of
Section 9.4.

--- Page 605 ---
When it is X’s turn to play (xplays = 1) the multiplexers direct Xreg to the
xin input of the move generator and Oreg to the oin input. The move
generator generates the next move on xout and this is ORed with the current
X position to generate the new X position that is stored back in Xreg at the
end of the cycle. The write to Xreg is enabled by xplays. Whenxplays is
false, the multiplexers switch the move generator inputs to generate a move
for O, and this move is written back to Oreg at the end of the cycle.
A VHDL description of the tic-tac-toe playing system is shown in Figure
19.11. After the declaration of the three state registers, an assignment
statement toggles xPlays each cycle. The input multiplexers are
implemented as conditional signal assignment statements. Two conditional
signal assignment statements compute the next state for Xreg and Oreg. The
OR of the move with the previous state is included in these statements.

--- Page 606 ---
Figure 19.11. VHDL description of the tic-tac-toe playing system.

--- Page 607 ---
19.4 HUFFMAN ENCODER/DECODER
A Huffman code is an entropy code that encodes each symbol of an alphabet
with a bit string. Frequently used symbols are encoded with short bit strings,
whereas infrequently used symbols are encoded with longer bit strings. To
be able to distinguish short bit strings from the first parts of longer bit
strings, each short bit string must not be used as a prefix for any longer bit
string. The net result is data compression; that is, a typical sequence of
symbols is encoded into fewer bits than would be required if all symbols
were encoded with the same number of bits.
19.4.1Huffman encoder
For this example we will build a Huffman encoder and decoder for the
letters of the alphabet, A–Z. The input to our encoder is a five-bit code,
where A = 1 and Z= 26.3 To prevent input characters from arriving faster
than our encoder can handle them, our encoder generates an input ready
(irdy) signal that indicates when the encoder is ready for the next input
character. The output is a serial bit stream of the encoded characters. To
make it easy for the decoder to find the start of the bit stream, our encoder
also generates an output valid (oval) signal that signals when the bits in the
output stream are valid. A block diagram symbol for our encoder showing
inputs and outputs is shown in Figure 19.12.
Figure 19.12. Schematic symbol for our Huffman encoder. The encoder accepts a five-bit character on
in each time irdy goes high and generates a bit serial output stream on out when oval is high.
Figure 19.13 shows the code we will use for our example in tree form.
The path from the root of the tree to a character gives the code for that
character. The letter E, for example, is reached by going right, left, left, and
hence is represented by the three-bit string 100. The letter J is reached by
going left seven times and then right twice, so it is represented by the nine-

--- Page 608 ---
bit string 000000011. Very frequently occurring characters like T and E are
represented with just three bits. Very infrequently occurring characters like
Z, Q, X, and J are represented with nine bits. Representing the code as a tree
makes it clear that a short string used to represent one symbol is not a prefix
of a longer string used to represent another symbol, since each leaf node of
the tree terminates the path used to reach that leaf.
Figure 19.13. Huffman code for the alphabet shown as a binary tree. Starting at the root, each branch
to the left denotes a 0 and each branch to the right denotes a 1. Hence the letter W, which is reached by
a sequence of left, left, left, right, left, is encoded as 00010.
A block diagram of a Huffman encoder is shown in Figure 19.14. A five-
bit input register holds the current symbol and is loaded with a new symbol
each time irdy is asserted. The symbol is used to address a ROM that stores
the string and string length associated with each symbol. For example, the
ROM stores string 0011 001000000 for the symbol T. This indicates that the
string representing T is three bits in length, and the three bits are 001.
Because the maximum length string is nine bits, we use four bits to represent
the length and nine bits to represent the string. Strings shorter than nine bits
are left-aligned in the nine-bit field so they can be shifted out to the left.


--- Page 609 ---
Figure 19.14. Block diagram of a Huffman encoder. A ROM stores the length and string for each
character. A counter counts down the length while a shift shifts out the string.
One cycle after a new symbol has been loaded into the input register by
irdy, signal load is asserted to load the length and string associated with that
symbol into a counter and a shift register. The counter then counts down
while the shift register shifts bits onto the output. When the counter reaches
a count of 2 (second to last bit), irdy is asserted to load the next symbol into
the input register, and when the counter reaches a count of 1 (last bit of this
symbol), load is asserted to load the length and string for the next symbol
into the counter and shift register.
A VHDL implementation of our Huffman encoder is shown in Figure
19.15. We use the up/down/load counter from Section 16.1.2 to implement
our counter and the left/right/load shift register from Section 16.2.2 to
implement our shifter. Note that although we don’t use the up function of the
counter or the right function of the shift register, this will still result in an
efficient implementation because the synthesizer will optimize away the
unused logic. The table is implemented in module HuffmanEncTable (not
shown), which is coded as a large case statement.

--- Page 611 ---
Figure 19.15. VHDL description of the Huffman encoder.
The control logic for the Huffman encoder is straightforward. One line of
code asserts irdy on a count of 2 or 0 – the latter is needed in order to load
the first symbol after a reset. A DFF then delays irdy by one cycle to
generate signal dirdy that is used to load the counter and shifter. One line of
code and a DFF are used to keep oval low after reset until the first time dirdy
is asserted.
Figure 19.16 shows the result of simulating the Huffman encoder on the
input string “THE.” The three symbols 14 (T), 08 (H), and 05 (E) in
hexadecimal are shown on in. The resulting output is 001 (T), 0110 (H), and
100 (E) shifted out bit serially on out starting with the first cycle in which
oval is asserted. The value in the counter can be seen on counting down from
the string length (3 or 4) to 1 for each symbol, while the value in the shift
register obits is shifting the string associated with each symbol left.

--- Page 613 ---
Figure 19.16. Waveforms from simulating the Huffman encoder on the string “THE.”
19.4.2Huffman decoder
Now that we have encoded a character string using a Huffman code, we will
look at building the corresponding decoder. To decode a Huffman-encoded
bit string we simply traverse the encoding tree of Figure 19.13, traversing
one edge for each bit of the input bit stream – the left branch for each 0, and
the right branch for each 1. When we encounter a terminal node during this
traversal, we emit the corresponding symbol on the output and restart our
traversal at the root of the tree.
To facilitate storing the decoding tree in a table, we relabel the nodes of
the tree as shown in Figure 19.17. Each node is assigned an integer that
serves as its address in the table. Note that the root does not need to be
stored in the table, so we start labeling nodes at 0 with the left child of the
root. At each entry in the table we store a type and a value. The type
indicates whether this node is an internal node (type = 0) or a terminal node
(type = 1). For a terminal node, the value holds the symbol to emit. For an
internal node, the value holds the address of the left child of this node
(which will always be an even number). The address of the right child can be
found by adding 1 to the value.
Figure 19.17. The Huffman code tree of Figure 19.13 relabeled to facilitate its storage in a decoding
table. Each node of the tree is assigned a unique integer that serves as its address in the table.
To see how we traverse the table representing the tree to decode a bit
string, consider decoding the bit string 001. We start at the root of the tree
which has a left child with address 0, and the first 0 of the string directs us to
this child. We read the entry for address 0 and find that it is an internal node
with a value of 2. The second bit of the string is a 0, so we proceed to

--- Page 614 ---
address 2 (if this bit were a 1, we would have gone to address 3). We read
the entry for address 2 and find that it is an internal node with a value of 6.
The third bit of the string is a 1, so we proceed to one more than this value,
address 7. Reading the entry for address 7, we find that it is a terminal node
with a value of “T” (hex 14). We emit this value and reset our machine to
start again from the root.
A block diagram of the Huffman decoder is shown in Figure 19.18, and
VHDL code for the decoder is shown in Figure 19.19. The address of the
current table node is held in the node register. When type is asserted –
indicating a terminal node – node is set to the value of the next input bit
(which selects one of the two children of the root to restart the search), the
value field from the table is enabled into the output register, and oval is
asserted on the following cycle. This outputs the current symbol and starts
the machine at one of the children of the root depending on the first bit of the
next symbol. If type is not asserted – indicating an internal node – the input
value is combined with the value field from the table to select the left or
right child of the current node – traversing the tree. The input value provides
the least significant bit of the node address, and the remaining bits come
from the value field of the table. This simple concatenation is possible
because all left children in the table have even addresses. If ival goes low,
the machine stalls, holding its present state until a valid input bit is available.
Signal ftype in the VHDL model forces the machine to start from the root on
the first valid input following reset.
Figure 19.18. Block diagram of a Huffman decoder. The node register holds the address of the current
tree node. The tree itself is stored in the ROM.

--- Page 616 ---
Figure 19.19. VHDL description of the Huffman decoder.
Waveforms showing the combined operation of the Huffman encoder
feeding the Huffman decoder are shown in Figure 19.20. The first 11 lines
are the same as Figure 19.16 and represent the operation of the encoder
encoding the symbol string “THE” into the bit string 0010110100. Signals
mid and mval are output from the encoder and input (as in and ival) to the
decoder. The state of the decoder is shown in the node variable, and the type
and value variables show what is read from the table at each node address.
Note that each time type is asserted – indicating a leaf node – the search
restarts on the next cycle with node at 0 or 1 (depending on mid). Also on the
cycle following type the just decoded symbol is output on out (values shown
are hexadecimal) and oval is asserted to indicate a valid output.

--- Page 618 ---
Figure 19.20. Waveforms of Huffman encoder and decoder, encoding the string “THE” into
0010110100 and then decoding this bit string back to “THE.”
Summary
In this chapter you have seen four extended examples that bring together
much of what you have learned in Chapters 14–18. The divide-by-3 counter
example reinforced basic skills in drawing state diagrams and implementing
simple FSMs in VHDL. The SOS detector is another example of FSM
factoring by combining common sequences. The tic-tac-toe game takes the
combinational circuit of Section 9.4 and turns it into an FSM that plays the
game against itself. Finally, the Huffman encoder and decoder give examples
of datapath finite-state machines in which the control is entirely derived
from the data state.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Huffman describes his encoding scheme in ref. [51].
Exercises
19.1Divide-by-4 counter. Modify the counter from Section 19.1 to be a
divide-by-4 counter.
19.2Divide-by-9 counter. Show how you can build a divide-by-9 counter
using two divide-by-3 counters. What happens to timing of the
output pulse when you combine two counters?
19.3Divide-by-3 Mealy machine. Show how you can implement the
divide-by-3 counter of Section 19.1 using only three states if you
allow the output to be a function of both the present state and the
input. An FSM with a combinational path from input to output like
this is called a Mealy machine, and an FSM where the output is a
function only of the present state is called a Moore machine.
19.4Modified SOS machine. Modify the factored SOS detector of Section
19.2 so that a dot is defined as one or two consecutive 1s and a dash
is defined as three or four consecutive 1s.
19.5Further SOS modifications. Alter the modified SOS machine from
Exercise 19.4 further so that the pauses between dots and dashes
within a character may be one or two consecutive 0s, the spaces

--- Page 619 ---
between characters are three or four consecutive 0s, and five or more
consecutive 0s denote an inter-word space. SOS should appear as a
single word to be recognized.
19.6Tic-tac-toe completion. Modify the tic-tac-toe game of Section 19.3
to include three new output signals: gover (game over), xwin (X has
won), and owin (O has won). When either player has won a game or
no empty spaces exit, assert gover and stop play until reset. If X (O)
is the winner, also assert xwin (owin).
19.7Tic-tac-toe competition. Further modify the tic-tac-toe game of
Exercise 19.6 to include two different move generators capable of
playing against each other instead of sharing a single generator.
Improve your move generator and demonstrate it winning against the
baseline of Figure 9.12.
19.8Tic-tac-toe tournament. Build a module that instantiates eight
different tic-tac-toe modules and plays them against each other in a
single-elimination tournament. Each match should be best of two,
alternating the module with the first play. If modules are tied at the
end of a match, your controller can pick an arbitrary winner. The
outputs of your system should be a three-bit signal champion
indicating the tournament winner and a valid signal cvalid
indicating tournament completion.
19.9Huffman encoder with flow control. Modify the Huffman encoder of
Section 19.4.1 to accept an input valid signal ival that is true when a
valid symbol is available on the input. A new symbol will be
accepted only when both ival and irdy are asserted. Note that the
output valid signal oval may need to go low after a string has been
shifted out if there is a wait for the next input signal.
19.10More flow control. Take the Huffman encoder from Exercise 19.9 and
extend it further to accept an output ready ordy signal that is true
when the module connected to the output is ready to accept the next
bit.
19.11 One-bit strings. Modify the Huffman encoder of Section 19.4.1 so it
will work with a length of 1, that is, for codes where a symbol may be
represented by a one-bit string.
19.12Pattern counter, I. Design a sequential logic circuit with a one-bit
input input and outputs output and count(3 downto 0). Your FSM
should generate output =1 when input = 0101 and be 0 otherwise.

--- Page 620 ---
Overlapping patterns need to be recognized, and the number of 0101
patterns must be shown on output count. An example of correct
behavior is
Draw a block diagram for your control and datapath FSM.
19.13Pattern counter, II. Write and verify the VHDL to implement the
pattern counter of Exercise 19.12.
1 See Exercise 19.3 for an approach that does require only three states.
2 For some practice modifying this factored SOS detector, see Exercises 19.4 and 19.5.
3 This corresponds to the low five-bits of the ASCII code for both upper-case and lower-case letters.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 621 ---
Part V
Practical design
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 622 ---
20
Verification and test
Verification and test are engineering processes that complement design.
Verification is the task of ensuring that a design meets its specification.
On a typical digital systems project, more effort is expended on
verification than on the design itself. Because of the high cost and long
delays involved in fabricating a chip, thorough verification is essential to
ensure that the chip works the first time. A design error that is not caught
during verification would result in costly delays and retooling.
Testing is performed to ensure that a particular instantiation of a design
functions properly. When a chip is fabricated, some transistors, wires, or
contacts may be faulty. A manufacturing test is performed to detect these
faults so the device can be repaired or discarded.
20.1 DESIGN VERIFICATION
Simulation is the primary tool used to verify that a design meets its
specification. The design is simulated using a number of tests that provide
stimulus to the unit being tested and check that the design produces correct
outputs. The VHDL testbenches we have seen throughout this book are
examples of such tests.
20.1.1 Verification coverage
The verification challenge amounts to ensuring that the set of test patterns,
the test suite, written to verify a design is complete. We measure the degree
of completion of a test suite by its coverage of the specification and of the

--- Page 623 ---
implementation. We typically insist on 100% coverage of both specification
features and implementation lines or edges to consider the design verified.
The specification coverage of a set of tests is measured by determining the
fraction of features in the specification that are exercised and checked by the
tests. For example, suppose you have developed a digital clock chip that
includes a day/date and an alarm function. Table 20.1 gives a partial list of
features to be tested. Even for something as simple as a digital clock, the list
of features can easily run into the hundreds. For a complex chip it is not
unusual to have 105 or more features. Each test verifies one or more features.
As tests are written, the features covered by each test are checked off.
Table 20.1. Partial list of features to be tested for a hypothetical digital clock chip
DesignationName Description
I increment Time increments properly
I.s inc. seconds Seconds register increments once per second
I.sw seconds wrapSeconds register rolls over from 59 to 0
I.m inc. minutes Minutes register increments when seconds roll over from 59 to 0
... ... (similar definitions apply for I.mw, I.h, I.hw, I.days, I.daysw,
I.months, I.monthsw, I.years)
I.leap leap year February wraps from 29 to 0 during a leap year
A alarm Alarm features
A.set alarm set Alarm can be set as specified
A.set.s alarm seconds
set
Seconds can be set as specified
. . . (similar features are used to set minutes and hours)
A.act alarm activateAlarm sounds when alarm time reached
A.quiet alarm
deactivate
Alarm can be turned off as specified
A.snooze alarm snoozeAlarm can be delayed for specified snooze interval
D display
features
Clock state is properly displayed for the current mode
D.time time display LCD display driven to display properly hours, minutes, and seconds
. . . . . . (other display functions are used for day, date, and alarm)

--- Page 624 ---
The hierarchy of the feature set makes it easier to manage the
development of tests. For example, the tests for alarm features can be
developed largely independently of the tests for time keeping and the tests
for display. This enables several groups to work on these tests
simultaneously.
In addition to checking for specification coverage, we also check our test
suite for implementation coverage. Our test suite should exercise every line
of our VHDL code. Every case of a case statement, for example, should be
activated. For every state machine in our design, every edge between states
should be traversed.
If after achieving 100% specification coverage we discover that some
lines of our VHDL code have not been activated by our test suite, we need to
take a close look at those lines and determine whether (a) they describe a
feature that was initially left off our feature list, (b) they are not needed, or
(c) they are assertions for error conditions that are not expected to occur
during test conditions.
20.1.2Types of tests
Ideally we would like to verify a feature using an exhaustive test, one that
applies every possible input stimulus and checks for the correct results.
Unfortunately, for all but the simplest modules, it is usually not feasible to
try all possible input combinations and all possible states. Consider a 64-bit
binary adder. There are 2128 = 3.4×1038 possible input patterns. Even if you
could test a million patterns per second, it would still take over 1025 years to
test all possible combinations.
In place of exhaustive tests, we typically perform a combination of
directed tests and random tests. A directed test is written to cover some
interesting test cases, such as an edge condition or an extreme value. With
our clock chip, for example, we would make sure to test that the clock rolls
over properly from 23:59:59 to 00:00:00. For our adder we would check an
add that produces the largest positive (and negative) number and an add one
more than this to check for overflow.
We write random tests to complement our directed tests. As the name
implies, these tests are randomly generated. For our adder, such a test
generates two random input operands and checks that the adder produces the
correct result. For our clock, such a test generates a random time and alarm

--- Page 625 ---
setting and verifies correct operation. For a processor, a random test
generates a random sequence of instructions along with interrupts, faults,
and other conditions, and verifies that the registers are left in the proper
states.
Random tests that uniformly sample the space of all inputs will find bugs
that happen with some frequency – e.g., 1 in 108 patterns. However, they are
not likely to find a bug that occurs for only one of 1038 possible test patterns.
To stack the deck in our favor, we often write random tests to sample the
input space non-uniformly around areas of interest. For our clock, for
example, we might sample alarm times within a few seconds of the current
time – because these patterns are more likely to have interesting alarm
behavior within the duration of our test. For a processor we might create
many tests that include combinations of exceptions with mis-predicted
branches because such conditions put stress onto a great deal of the
processor’s logic.
A typical test suite may involve 109 or more test patterns. We clearly
cannot look through all of the results manually to see whether they are
correct each time we rerun the test. Instead, we need to make our tests self-
checking. A common approach is to compare our design with a higher-level
model of the same function. These high-level models are often written in a
programming language like “C” and may not match the exact cycle-by-cycle
timing of the design being verified. Of course, the high-level model may
have bugs. However, it is unlikely that they are the same bugs as in the
VHDL design.
20.1.3Static timing analysis
In addition to verifying that our design is functionally correct, we must also
verify that it satisfies setup- and hold-time margins (Chapter 15). As
discussed in Section 15.6, this is performed by a static timing analyzer –
either one built into the synthesis tool or a separate program, or both.
While, in theory, timing verification could be performed via simulation, in
practice it is very hard to construct a set of tests that is guaranteed to test the
timing of the worst-case path. With static timing analysis, all paths are
checked without the need to generate test vectors. The downside of static
timing analysis is that it often reports issues on paths that are guaranteed
never to be used.

--- Page 626 ---
20.1.4Formal verification
For some modules, a proof technique can be used to verify (prove)
functional correctness without the need for simulation. For example, the tool
Formality uses equivalence-checking techniques to prove that two versions
of a design are equivalent. Proof techniques are also often used to verify
protocols, such as cache coherence protocols in a microprocessor. They are
able to verify that all state transitions preserve certain properties without the
need to write tests that cover all of the transitions.
20.1.5Bug tracking
During the design verification process, a bug-tracking system is often used
to keep track of all discrepancies (bugs) that are identified by tests. Bugzilla
is an example of an open-source bug-tracking system.
When a test finds an error, a bug report is opened. When the designer
corrects the bug and verifies the solution, or if the feature the bug was
testing is abandoned, the bug is closed. One can get a good sense of the state
of a design project by tracking the number of open bugs at a given point in
time. Initially there are no bugs. As tests are written, the number of bugs
increases, reaching a maximum when full test coverage is reached. The
number of bugs then monotonically decreases as bugs are closed, without
introducing too many new bugs, one hopes. Eventually the number of bugs
reaches zero, and the design can be released for manufacturing.
By extrapolating the number of bugs as a function of time, one can
estimate when the number of open bugs will reach zero. The distribution of
closure times also gives some insight into the debugging process. The
majority of bugs are closed quickly, within one day. However, a small
fraction of difficult bugs remain open for a week or more.
20.2 TEST
The test process verifies that a particular instance of a design in fact
implements the design. As with verification, we desire to come up with a set
of tests that achieves 100% coverage. However, rather than covering
features, a manufacturing test must cover potential faults in the design.

--- Page 627 ---
Anything that could be manufactured incorrectly must be checked for. We
use a fault model to reason about the set of potential faults.
Because test time is costly, and every chip manufactured must be tested,
there is an emphasis on completing a test as quickly as possible. Thus, we
desire to find the shortest test that achieves 100% coverage. This is in
contrast to verification where, to a first approximation, verification time is
not critical.
20.2.1Fault models
A fault model is an abstract model of physical faults that could cause a chip
not to work. On a modern integrated circuit, connections (wires and
contacts) could be open or shorted. Similarly, a transistor can fail in a way
that causes it to be always on or always off.
The fault model that is almost universally used to abstract all of these
potential failure modes is the stuck-at fault model. This model abstracts all
potential faults as resulting in a logical node of the circuit being either stuck
at logic “0” or stuck at logic “1.”
Consider the two-input NAND gate of Figure 20.1. Real failures in a chip
implementing this gate could cause one or more of the four transistors M1–
M4 to be shorted or opened. We model all of these potential failures by the
output of the gate being stuck at either 0 or 1. This model is not completely
accurate. For example, if PFET M1 is open, the gate does not function
properly, but the output is not stuck in one state. The output will still go high
when b = 0 and will go low when a = b = 1. Thus, a test that detects a stuck-
at-0 fault at the output may not detect an M1-open fault. Despite this
shortcoming, good coverage of a stuck-at fault model results in good
coverage of actual manufacturing faults.


--- Page 628 ---
Figure 20.1. A two-input NAND gate. With the stuck-at fault model, all possible physical faults in this
gate are modeled as the output q being stuck at 0 or stuck at 1.
20.2.2Combinational testing
To test a block of combinational logic, we need a set of test patterns,
sometimes called test vectors,1 that detect whether any node in the logic
block is stuck at 0 or 1. Consider the full adder of Figure 20.2 (repeated from
Figure 10.5). With the stuck-at fault model there are ten possible faults. Each
node, namely g′, p′, s, cout, or the output of Q3, could be stuck at 0 or stuck
at 1. To detect a particular fault, we need to drive the node in question to the
opposite state while the output is sensitive to that node. As shown in Table
20.2, two test vectors – all 1s and all 0s – suffice to cover all ten stuck-at
faults (labeled signal-0 (−1) for stuck at 0 (1)) in this circuit.
Figure 20.2. CMOS gate-level implementation of a full adder.
Table 20.2. Two test vectors are sufficient for 100% stuck-at fault coverage of the full adder of
Figure 20.2
a b cin g′ p′ Q3 cout s Faults covered
0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 g′-0, p′-0, cout-1, sout-1, Q3-0
1 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 g′-1, p′-1, cout-0, sout-0, Q3-1
Automatic test-pattern generation (ATPG) tools automate the process of
generating test vectors for combinational logic. Given a netlist, an ATPG
tool will generate a minimal set of test vectors that provides 100% fault
coverage – if such coverage is possible.
20.2.3Testing redundant logic

--- Page 629 ---
Some logic includes redundant gates. This is common, for example, in
asynchronous logic and other situations where hazards must be covered. It is
not possible to achieve 100% fault coverage on such logic unless additional
signals are added to disable the redundancy.
Consider, for example, the two-input multiplexer with no hazards of
Figure 20.3 (repeated from Figure 6.19(b)). It is not possible to test for a
stuck-at-0 fault at the output of gate Q3. Any time a = b = 1, the output of
either Q2 or Q4 will be high, causing the output f to be high regardless of the
state of Q3.
Figure 20.3. Hazard-free two-input multiplexer circuit (repeated from Figure 6.19(b)) has a redundant
gate, Q3, that cannot be tested.
To test this circuit we have to introduce an auxiliary input to one of the
other two gates. Figure 20.4 depicts adding an input test to the upper AND
gate. During normal operation test = 1 and the multiplexer operates as
before. We allow test to take on either state during testing. With this input,
the vector a = 1, b = 1, c = 1, test = 0 detects a stuck-at-0 fault on Q3.
Figure 20.4. Adding a test input to gate Q2 makes the circuit of Figure 20.3 testable.
20.2.4Scan
The problem of testing sequential logic can be reduced to the testing of
combinational logic through the use of scan chains. In a design that uses

--- Page 630 ---
scan, a multiplexer is included on the input of every flip-flop, as shown in
Figure 20.5. When the select input of the multiplexer is in the scan state, the
flip-flops are connected together into a shift register.
Figure 20.5. Adding a multiplexer to each flip-flop enables all the flip-flops on a chip to be connected
in a scan-chain shift register when signal scan is asserted. Test vectors can be shifted in, and test
results shifted out, via the scan chain.
To apply one test vector to every combinational block on a chip, the chip
is placed in scan mode and a test pattern is shifted into the resulting shift
register. One clock cycle is then run with the scan input low to sample the
output of all of the logic blocks into the flip-flops. Finally, scan is asserted
again and the result of the test is shifted out to be checked. A new vector can
be shifted in at the same time as the result is being shifted out.
For scan testing of sequential logic to be complete, all inputs and outputs
of combinational blocks must be accessible via the scan chain. This implies
that macros like I/Os and SRAMs must include scannable registers on their
inputs and outputs.
The scan technique can also be applied to test the printed-circuit boards
that chips are assembled on. By connecting the chip inputs and outputs
together in a scan chain, one can shift in a test pattern to test the connections

--- Page 631 ---
between chips on a board. This technique is often called boundary scan
because the inputs and outputs are the boundary of a chip.
A common interface used in many integrated circuits for scan testing is
the IEEE’s JTAG interface [57].
20.2.5Built-in self-test (BIST)
On-chip memories, RAMs and ROMs (Sections 8.8 and 8.9), require many
test patterns for thorough testing. For a RAM, every bit must be written with
both a “1” and a “0” and then read back. To check for addressing faults,
locations must be written with contrasting patterns, so that a read from
location a cannot be mistaken for a read from location b. While such testing
could be done through the scan chains, it would take a prohibitive amount of
time, driving up test cost.
To shorten the testing time for on-chip memories, most modern chips
employ built-in self-test (BIST). A BIST circuit is a state machine associated
with a memory or group of memories that generates and checks test patterns.
While a scan chain requires thousands to millions of cycles to apply a single
test pattern, a BIST circuit can apply a test pattern every clock cycle –
accelerating the testing of RAMs by a factor equal to the length of the scan
chain.
A typical BIST circuit is a simple datapath finite-state machine as
illustrated in Figure 20.6. During normal operation the multiplexers select
their upper input and the RAM operates normally. When the start input to
the BIST controller is asserted, the BIST controller commands the
multiplexers to select their lower inputs and begins applying test patterns. An
address generator sequences through the memory addresses. A pattern
generator selects from a number of predefined patterns, e.g., 01010101 and
10101010, to write to the memory, and a comparator checks data values read
from the memory. When the test is complete, the done line is asserted,
whether the test was passed or not is indicated on the pass output, and the
multiplexers switch back to their upper inputs. The details of the operation
of this FSM are examined in Exercise 20.13.

--- Page 632 ---
Figure 20.6. Built-in-self-test circuit for a RAM.
Some BIST circuits go one step further and repair errors they find during
testing. A RAM can be made repairable by providing spare rows and/or
spare columns. The BIST circuit writes a register with the row or column
address that is to be replaced by the spare. The details of memory repair are
explored in Exercise 20.14.
Another class of BIST exists for pseudo-random testing of logic. On-chip
LBIST state machines generate a series of test patterns that are scanned into
registers, clocked, and then scanned out into a multiple-input signature
register (MISR) also located on-chip. This MISR reduces all of the state on a
chip into a handful of 64-bit words using a series of shifts and XORs. This
process is repeated many times, and finally the MISRs are scanned off-chip
and compared with their expected values. Because the FSMs are located
entirely on-chip, LBIST can run many more test cases than would be run
with a traditional scan.
20.2.6Characterization
Characterization tests are performed on samples of a design to determine
typical and extreme parameters of the design, to determine the operating
envelope of the design, and to measure the aging properties of the device.
Unlike manufacturing tests, which are performed on every chip produced,
characterization tests are performed on only a small sample of chips.
The parameters measured by a characterization test include the electrical
parameters of the chip’s inputs and outputs, and the power consumed by the

--- Page 633 ---
chip in different operating modes. Input and output circuits may be
characterized by measuring a few operating points, for example VOH and
VOL under a particular load, or a complete V−I curve may be measured.
The operating envelope of a chip is the range of supply voltage VDD and
clock frequency fclk over which a chip operates properly. The envelope is
measured by running a functional test of the chip at all combinations of VDD
and fclk and plotting which combinations resulted in a passing test. Such a
plot, an example of which is shown in Figure 20.7, is often called a shmoo
plot because at one point such a plot resembled a cartoon character called a
shmoo.
Figure 20.7. An example shmoo plot shows the range of VDD and fclk over which a part operates.
The example shmoo plot shows that the part in question cannot operate
below a minimum voltage of Vmin = 0.6 V. At Vmin it will operate up to 800
MHz. Increasing voltage enables higher-frequency operation, reaching a
maximum of 1.6 GHz at 1.2 V.
A characterization test may include an accelerated-life test, sometimes
called a burn-in test to measure the failure rate of the device. Such a test is

--- Page 634 ---
typically performed at elevated temperature (100 °C or more) to accelerate
aging of the part according to the Arrhenius equation. A sufficient sample of
parts is operated at a sufficiently high temperature for a sufficiently long
period of time to give a statistically significant measure of device failure
rate, or at least to guarantee with a specified confidence factor that the rate is
below a required level.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned the basics of verification and testing. Design
verification is the process of verifying that a design meets its specification.
We write verification tests to give complete specification coverage – to make
sure all features of the design are correctly implemented – and
implementation coverage – to ensure that every line of VHDL code has been
exercised. To manage the verification process, we track the number of open
bugs. An extrapolation of this number gives a good estimate of when the
verification process will be complete.
Test is the process of verifying that a particular device has been
manufactured correctly. We use a fault model, typically a stuck-at fault
model, to measure the coverage of a manufacturing test. To detect faulty
chips reliably, a test should have 100% coverage of stuck-at faults. We may
have to add signals to redundant logic to achieve this coverage.
The process of developing tests for synchronous digital systems is highly
automated. Automatic test-pattern generation (ATPG) tools automatically
generate test patterns (vectors) for combinational logic. Connecting flip-
flops into scan chains allows all logic to be tested as combinational logic.
Characterization involves testing a sample of parts to determine the
operating envelope, critical parameters, and failure rate of a device type. The
VDD, fclk operating envelope may be visualized with a shmoo plot. An
accelerated-life test at elevated temperature may be used to estimate failure
rate.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
For more information about verification on a real processor, Intel’s Pentium
4 ®, read ref. [10]. It provides an interesting breakdown of the source of bugs
in the project, the top two of which are “goofs” and “miscommunication.”

--- Page 635 ---
For more information on pattern generation for test, refer to refs. [61] and
[115]. Many generation algorithms rely on the idea of fault-equivalence [73].
One of the first scan latches was IBM’s LSSD latch [40]; ref. [9] gives an
overview of how it is used in systems.
Two papers that give an overview of memory BIST and repair are refs.
[12] and [65]. BIST can also be used to test logic, as explained by
McCluskey [72]. Riley et al. [96] detail the test strategy used in IBM’s Cell
® processor.
Shmoo was invented in the 1970s by Huston, and further reading about
shmoo in a modern setting can be found in ref. [7]. If the reader prefers
comic books to academic papers, one such book featuring the shmoo is ref.
[24].
More information about the maths behind accelerated-life testing can be
found in [87].
Exercises
20.1Feature list, I. Write a feature list for a simple four-function
calculator chip. The chip connects to a key pad and drives individual
segments of a four-digit seven-segment display.
20.2Feature list, II. Write a feature list for a digital watch chip.
20.3Feature list, III. Write a feature list for the traffic-light controller of
Figure 17.10.
20.4Feature List, IV. Write a feature list for the vending machine of
Figure 16.21.
20.5Directed tests. Write a VHDL testbench that applies six directed test
patterns to a 32-bit 2’s complement adder. Explain what each of your
patterns is checking for.
20.6Random tests. Write a VHDL testbench that applies 100 random
patterns to a 32-bit adder.
20.7Implementation coverage. Write a testbench for the traffic-light
controller of Figure 17.11 that exercises every edge of the state
diagram.
20.8Combinational testing, I. Write a minimal set of test vectors that
gives 100% coverage of the decoder of Figure 8.3.
20.9Combinational testing, II. Write a minimal set of test vectors that
gives 100% coverage of the multiplexer of Figure 8.10(a).

--- Page 636 ---
20.10Fault models, I. Consider a fault model where we consider the set of
gate-input stuck-at faults. For example, in the full adder of Figure
10.5 the bottom input of Q5 may be stuck-at-1 independently of the
other two inputs driven by signal p′. With the 13 gate inputs in the
figure, there are 26 possible faults. Write a set of test vectors that
covers the six faults associated with Q5.
20.11 Fault models, II. Repeat Exercise 20.10 but for the four faults
associated with Q3.
20.12Fault models, III. Repeat Exercise 20.10 but for the six faults
associated with Q4.
20.13Built-in self-test. Write a VHDL model for a BIST unit like that
shown in Figure 20.6 that tests an 8 KB RAM. Your BIST unit should
perform the following test procedure.
(a) Write every location in the RAM with the binary value
01010101.
(b) For each location i write M[i] =10101010. Verify that M[i]
=10101010 and that M[ j] =01010101 ∀i ≠ j. (c) Write M[i]
=01010101.
(d) Repeat steps (a)–(c) with the data values complemented.
(e) Assert a done signal and, if successful, a pass signal.
20.14Memory repair. Write a VHDL model for a memory that uses an
eight-bit register to act as a spare byte for an 8 KB RAM array. Use a
13-bit register to hold the address of the byte being replaced and an
additional bit to indicate that replacement should occur. When the
replacement bit is set, reads and writes to the address in the address
register should go to the eight-bit data register rather than to the
RAM array.
1 So called because they are bit vectors used for testing.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 637 ---
Part VI
System design
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 638 ---
21
System-level design
After reading to this point in the book, you now have the skills to design
complex combinational and sequential logic modules. However, if
someone were to ask you to design a DVD player, a computer system, or
an Internet router you would realize that each of these is not a single
finite-state machine (or even a single datapath with associated finite-state
controller). Rather, a typical system is a collection of modules, each of
which may include several datapaths and finite-state controllers. These
systems must first be decomposed into simple modules before the design
and analysis skills you have learned in the previous chapters can be
applied. However, the problem remains that of how to partition the system
to this level where the design becomes manageable. This system-level
design is one of the most interesting and challenging aspects of digital
systems.
21.1 SYSTEM DESIGN PROCESS
The design of a system involves the following steps.
Specification The most important step in designing any system is
deciding – and clearly specifying in writing – what you are
going to build. We discuss specifications in more detail in
Section 21.2.
Partitioning Once the system has been specified, the main task in
system design is dividing the system into manageable
subsystems or modules. This is a process of divide and conquer.

--- Page 639 ---
The overall system is divided into subsystems that can then be
designed (conquered) separately. At each stage, the subsystems
should be specified to the same level of detail as the overall
system was during our first step. As described in Section 21.3,
we can partition a system by state, task, or interface.
Interface specification It is particularly important that the
interfaces between subsystems be described in detail. With good
interface specifications, individual modules can be developed
and verified independently. When possible, interfaces should be
independent of module internals – allowing modules to be
modified without affecting the interface, or the design of
neighboring modules.
Timing design Early in the design of a system, it is important to
describe the timing and sequencing of operations. In particular,
as work flows between modules, the sequencing of which
module does a particular task on a particular cycle must be
worked out to ensure that the right data come together at the
correct place and time. This timing design also drives the
performance tuning step described below.
Module design Once the system has been partitioned, modules
and interfaces have been specified, and the system timing has
been worked out, the individual modules can be designed and
verified independently. Often, the exact performance and timing
(e.g., throughput, latency, or pipeline depth) of a module is not
known exactly until after the module design has been
completed. As these performance parameters are finalized, they
may affect the system timing and require performance tuning to
meet system performance specifications. The test of a good
system design is if such independently designed modules can be
assembled into a working system without reworking.
Performance tuning Once the performance parameters of each
module are known (or at least have been estimated), the system
can be analyzed to see whether it meets its performance
specification. If a system falls short of a performance goal – or
if the goal is to achieve the highest possible performance at a

--- Page 640 ---
given cost – performance can be tuned by adding parallelism.
This topic is treated in more detail in Chapter 23.
21.2 SPECIFICATION
All too often people start designing a system without a clear specification,
only to discover halfway (or further) through the design that they are
building the wrong system. Much work is then discarded as they restart the
design process. Another problem with vague specifications is that two
designers may read the specification differently and design incompatible
system parts.
A system design may start from an oral discussion of requirements.
However, writing the specification down is a critical step to make sure that
there are no misunderstandings about what is being designed. A written
specification can also be used to validate that the right system is being
designed by reviewing the specification with prospective customers and
users of the system.
At a minimum, a good specification must include the following
descriptions.
(1) The overall system: what the system is, what it does, and how it is
used.
(2) All inputs and outputs: their formats, range of values, timing, and
protocols.
(3) All user-visible state. This includes configuration registers, mode bits,
and internal memories.
(4) All modes of operation.
(5) All notable features of the system.
(6) All interesting edge cases, i.e., how the system handles marginal cases.
The remainder of this section gives specifications for three example
systems: a “Pong” game, a DES cracker, and a music player.
21.2.1Pong

--- Page 641 ---
Overall description Pong is a video game that was designed by
Atari in the early 1970s. It displays a ping-pong-like game on a
VGA video screen. Users control the game using push-buttons
to move the paddles and serve. Games are played to 11 points.
The player winning the previous point serves. The screen is
considered to be a 64 × 64 grid for purposes of the game – point
(0, 0) is top left. An example screen-shot is shown in Figure
21.1.
Figure 21.1. The Pong display consists of two paddles, a ball, and the score on a 64 × 64 grid.
Inputs and outputs The inputs and outputs of our Pong system
are specified in Table 21.1. Note that our digital module
produces as output digital red, green, blue, and sync outputs for
the display. A separate analog module combines these signals to
produce the analog signals to drive the display.
Table 21.1. Inputs and outputs of Pong system
Name DirectionWidthDescription
leftUp input 1 When true, moves the left paddle up
leftDowninput 1 When true, moves the left paddle down

--- Page 642 ---
leftStart input 1 When true, starts the game or serves the ball from left to right
rightUp input 1 When true, moves the right paddle up
rightDowninput 1 When true, moves the right paddle down
rightStartinput 1 When true, starts the game or serves the ball from right to left
red output 8 The intensity of the red color on the screen at the current pixel
green output 8 The intensity of the green color on the screen at the current pixel
blue output 8 The intensity of the blue color on the screen at the current pixel
hsync output 1 Horizontal synchronization – when asserted, this starts a horizontal
retrace of the screen
vsync output 1 Vertical synchronization – when asserted, this starts a vertical
retrace of the screen
State The visible state of the Pong system is shown in Table 21.2.
Most of this state represents the positions of game elements on
the video screen. This state is visible in the sense that it can be
seen on the display. The user cannot directly read or write this
state.
Table 21.2. User-visible state of the Pong system
Name Width Description
rightPadY 6 y-position of the top of the right paddle
leftPadY 6 y-position of the top of the left paddle
ballPosX 6 x-position of the ball
ballPosY 6 y-position of the ball
ballVelX 1 x-velocity of the ball (0 = left, 1 = right)
ballVelY 2 y-velocity of the ball (00 = none, 01 = up, 10 = down)
rightScore 4 Score of right player
leftScore 4 Score of left player
mode 2 Current mode – idle, rserve, lserve, play
Modes The modes of the Pong system are shown in Table 21.3.
Table 21.3. Modes of the Pong system
NameDescription

--- Page 643 ---
idle Score is zero, awaiting first serve: first start button pressed zeroes score and starts game
with serve from that direction (e.g., lstart serves from left to right)
play Ball in play: ball advances according to velocity; hitting top or bottom of court reverses y-
velocity; hitting paddle reverses x-velocity; missing left or right paddle enters rserve or
lserve mode, respectively, and increments appropriate score
lserveWaiting for left player to serve: when lstart is pressed, ball is served from left to right
rserveWaiting for right player to serve: when rstart is pressed, ball is served from right to left
While we have given many details of the Pong video game, this
specification is by no means complete. Things left unspecified include the
value of the ball position and velocity on a serve, how the y-velocity of the
ball changes when hitting a paddle, and the height of a paddle. A complete
specification should leave nothing to the imagination. In Exercise 21.1 the
reader is given the task of completing the specification of the Pong game. In
practice, specifications are typically completed in an iterative manner, with
additional details specified on each iteration. Specification reviews are often
held, where a specification is presented to a group and reviewed critically to
identify missing or incorrect items.
21.2.2DES cracker
Overall description The DES cracker is a system that accepts a
block of ciphertext encrypted using the data encryption standard
and searches the space of possible keys to find the key that was
used to encrypt the ciphertext. Since DES is a symmetric-key
algorithm, the same key is used to encode and decode the data.
Finding this key enables the user to read and send coded text. To
check that the cracker has the correct key, the system checks the
output to see whether it is plaintext. We assume that the original
plaintext is ASCII text that uses only capital letters and
numbers.
 The DES standard works on eight-byte pieces of code, not a
full encrypted message. Our cracker will therefore iterate
through eight-byte chunks with a key, checking each for
plaintext. If a key decodes all pieces into plaintext, success is
declared.

--- Page 644 ---
Inputs and outputs The inputs and outputs of the DES cracker are
shown in Table 21.4. The user places one block of ciphertext
onto the cipherText at a time, asserting the cipherTextValid
signal. Once all of the text has been loaded by the user, the start
signal is asserted and the system begins decryption. For the
remainder of this section, we assume that all the data have been
loaded into storage RAM. We task the reader with specifying
the input protocol in Exercise 21.2.
 With the ciphertext loaded, the user pulses the start signal.
This causes the cracker to run until completion. When a key
successfully decrypts the ciphertext into plaintext, found is
asserted and the key is placed on key.
Table 21.4. Inputs and outputs of the DES cracker system
Name DirectionWidthDescription
cipherText input 8 Ciphertext to be cracked: this text is input one byte at a time;
a byte is accepted on each clock for which cipherTextValid
and cipherTextReady are asserted
cipherTextValid input 1 Asserted when cipherText has the next valid byte of
ciphertext to load
cipherTextReadyoutput 1 Asserted when the system is able to accept a byte of
ciphertext
start input 1 Start key search: asserted when loading of ciphertext is
complete to direct the system to start search of key space
found output 1 Asserted when the key is found
key output 56 When found is asserted, the recovered key is output on this
signal
State The different visible state in the DES cracker is shown in
Table 21.5. The key is set at each decryption iteration and its
value is held upon decryption success. The blockNumber state
selects a cipherTextBlock for decryption; mode indicates
whether the system is currently reading new data, doing a
decryption, or is idle.
Table 21.5. Visible state of the DES-cracking system
Name Width Description

--- Page 645 ---
key 56 DES key currently being used to decrypt
cipherTextBlock 64 Encoded block of text being decrypted
blockNumber 16 Ciphertext block number currently under decryption
mode 2 Current mode – idle, reading, computing
cipherTextStore 512 Ciphertext block storage
Modes The different operation modes of the DES cracker are
shown in Table 21.6. We use three modes idle, dataIn, and
cracking.
Table 21.6. Modes of the DES-cracking system
Name Description
idle After reset or the successful decryption of a block of text: remains in the idle state until
cipherTextValid is asserted to begin reading in new data
dataIn Data being read into the ciphertext storage, one byte at a time
crackingThe engine continuously iterates over possible keys until a match has been found
This specification has been for a DES cracker with a limited flexibility. In
the exercises, we will ask you to extend this specification to include the
ability to interrupt cracking, input new data, and output plaintext blocks.
21.2.3Music player
Overall description The music player is used to read a song out of
a RAM module and synthesize an audible waveform. The song
is stored in a format that indicates a series of note values, each
with a fixed 100 ms duration. The output of the synthesizer
serves as the input to an audio codec. The codec requires one
new input, in s0.15 format, every 20.8 μs (48 kHz). Our initial
design will allow only a single note to be played at once, but we
will enable multiple harmonics of that note.
Inputs and outputs Table 21.7 lists the inputs and outputs of the
music player. The RAM that stores the song in the music player
is assumed to have a song preloaded. The user simply indicates
the beginning of playback. After some number of cycles, a value
for the next time step and a high valueValid appear at the output

--- Page 646 ---
of the system. This value is held until the next signal is asserted
by the codec, triggering computation of the next output value.
Table 21.7. Inputs and outputs of the music player
Name DirectionWidthDescription
start input 1 Begin playing of the selected song
value output s0.15 The current value in the audible waveform, this signal must be
valid once every 20.8 μs
valueValid output 1 Indicates that the output value is valid
next input 1 The codec is ready for the next value
State The states for our music player are shown in Table 21.8. The
noteNumber state indicates the current note in playback. This
note is read from the song RAM and converted into a frequency.
This frequency value is a 0.16 number and represents the
interval between two 48 kHz samples in radians. A value of 1
indicates π radians between samples, or a 24 kHz note (which
you cannot hear). Using this frequency and the time value, the
synthesizer calculates the harmonics and output wave value.
Table 21.8. Visible states of the music player
Name WidthDescription
noteNumber16 Note of the song to be synthesized
noteFrequency0.16 Frequency of the current note
time 12 Current time-step for the output, in units of 20.83 μs; every note has a
4800 time-step duration
mode 1 Idle or playback
Modes The music player has only two modes, playback and idle,
shown in Table 21.9. The user is able only to initiate playback
from the idle state, and the song plays until completion.
Table 21.9. Modes of the music playing system
Name Description
idle No music being played

--- Page 647 ---
playback Generating audible output
21.3 PARTITIONING
Much of system design involves partitioning a system into modules. While
many consider this to be an art, most systems are partitioned by state, task,
or interface. Most systems employ some combination of these three
partitioning techniques. This partitioning may be hierarchical, with a
different type of partitioning at each level. For example, a system may
employ task partitioning at one level and then have one task further
partitioned by state and another task further partitioned by interface.
With state partitioning, the system is divided into modules associated with
different pieces of state (user-visible or strictly internal). Each module (e.g.,
VHDL design entity) is responsible for maintaining its portion of system
state and communicating appropriate views of this state to other modules in
the system.
With task partitioning, the function performed by a system is divided into
tasks, and separate modules are associated with each task. There are many
sub-genres of task partitioning: pipelining (Chapter 23) divides one large
task into a series of subtask modules, with each subtask passing its output to
the next subtask in the series. With master–slave partitioning, a master
module oversees the operation of a number of slave modules – doling out
work to the slaves and handling their responses. With resource partitioning,
a module is associated with, and arbitrates access to, a shared resource. For
example, a memory module may be shared across many clients in a complex
system. As another example, a route-computation module in a router is a
resource that may be shared across many input ports in a router. With
model–view– controller partitioning, the system is partitioned into a model
module (which contains most of the system function), a view module
(responsible for all output (views of the model)), and a controller module
(responsible for all input (controlling the model)).
Associating modules with input and output (as with the view and
controller parts of model–view–controller partitioning) is actually a form of
interface partitioning. With interface partitioning, a separate module is
associated with each interface (or related set of interfaces) of a system. For

--- Page 648 ---
example, a system with a DDR3 DRAM interface will typically have a
separate module that controls this interface, arbitrates among clients sharing
the interface, and provides a simpler, more abstract interface to the rest of
the system.
21.3.1Pong
Figure 21.2 shows how the Pong video game system is partitioned along two
axes. Horizontally, the system is partitioned by task, into model, view, and
controller. The model portion of the system is further partitioned vertically
by state with the ball state, the paddle state, the score, and the mode in
separate modules. The figure also shows the interfaces defined between the
modules. In most cases, a module simply exports all or part of its state (e.g.,
score, ballPos).
Figure 21.2. The Pong game is partitioned using the model–view–controller decomposition. The score
and position of the ball and paddles constitute the model. This model is viewed by a VGA display
module. A controller module conditions input buttons to affect the model. Note that the model is
further partitioned by state into separate modules for ball, paddles, and score.
21.3.2DES cracker

--- Page 649 ---
The DES cracker is partitioned into several separate modules, as shown in
Figure 21.3. The master FSM acts as the system controller. The ciphertext
storage block reads and stores the ciphertext. When the master FSM pulses
the firstBlock signal (for one cycle), the storage puts the first block onto the
cipherTextBlock bus (and holds it). The storage FSM outputs the next block
in storage when the master pulses nextBlock. The key generator iterates
through a series of DES keys in order to find a match. The firstKey and
nextKey signals work in the same way as the firstBlock and nextBlock
signals. The DES decrypt block takes multiple cycles to decrypt a block and
asserts DESdone upon completing an iteration. Finally, the text checker
asserts isPlainText when the “plain” text is indeed plaintext.
Figure 21.3. A DES cracker is partitioned by task. The modules perform the subtasks of generating
keys, sequencing the ciphertext, decrypting the ciphertext to plaintext, and checking the decryption
output to see whether it is plaintext. A master FSM module controls overall timing and sequencing.
21.3.3Music synthesizer
We have partitioned the music player to have a pipelined series of tasks,
shown in Figure 21.4. The note FSM will iterate through the song, reading
each note from memory. This note is converted into a frequency in the next
block, and stored into the synthesizer. The synthesizer FSM will begin at
time-step 0 and calculate the output waveform at each time-step for the
duration of the note. This computation itself involves taking the sine of a
value, and we use a RAM to look up these sine values.

--- Page 650 ---
Figure 21.4. A simple music synthesizer is partitioned by task. A note FSM determines the next note
to play. A note-to-frequency block converts the note into a frequency. A sine-wave synthesizer FSM
synthesizes a sine wave of the specified frequency.
A more complex synthesizer is shown in Figure 21.5. It includes two new
state machines for computing harmonics and an attenuation envelope. The
harmonic FSM communicates with the synthesizer FSM and receives a
series of s0.15 waveform values. The harmonic FSM combines these waves
as input to the envelope FSM. This final FSM attenuates the wave with an
attack– decay envelope using the current time-step. A nextNote signal from
the note FSM indicates when to reset the time counter.
Figure 21.5. An expanded version of the music synthesizer uses a sine-wave synthesizer module that
returns the value of multiple harmonics for each note, a harmonics FSM that combines these
harmonics, and an envelope FSM that modulates the resulting waveform with an attack–decay
envelope.
Flow control is enforced in the music playback system through the use of
ready signals. The output codec notifies the synthesizer FSM when it is
ready for the next waveform value. When a note has completed playback,
the sine-wave synthesizer asserts the ready signal to the note FSM.
Summary

--- Page 651 ---
In this chapter you have started to explore the process of system design,
namely how to take the specification for a complex system and decompose it
into modules that are simple enough to be designed directly. We have
introduced a six-step process for system design:
(1) specification,
(2) partitioning,
(3) interface specification,
(4) timing design,
(5) module design, and
(6) performance tuning.
We then explored the first two steps via three extended examples. It is
important to specify a system completely before starting the design process –
to avoid repeated backtracking, confusion, and inconsistent interpretations.
The specification should have sufficient detail that no externally visible
feature is left to the designer’s imagination during the remainder of the
design process.
The process of partitioning a design is at the heart of system design.
Designs are usually partitioned into modules associated with a part of system
state, atask, oraninterface. Partitioning is often done recursively. Our Pong
example partitions first by tasks using the model–view–controller
decomposition and then partitions the model by state.
Chapters 22–25 describe the remaining steps of the design process in
more detail.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
The DES standard [35] describes in detail the implementation of DES
encryptors and decryptors. Olson and Belar describe one of RCA’s first
music synthesizers in ref. [91]. The paper, written in 1955, includes images
of the machine taking up an entire office wall.
The actual block diagram from the Pong video game system is shown in
ref. [17]. This paper, written by Atari’s Vice President of Engineering in
1977, provides schematics for blocks such as the sound generator and score
tracker. For a description of many early items of consumer electronics,
including video games, consult ref. [98].

--- Page 652 ---
Exercises
21.1Pong specification. The specification of the Pong video game in
Section 21.2.1 is purposely incomplete. Some of the missing
specifications are listed in the text. Identify as many unspecified
issues as you can and give a specification of each.
21.2DES: data write. In the DES block, we included inputs for writing
data into the cipher block storage, but did not include that logic in the
partitioned diagram (Figure 21.3). Update the block diagram to
include the ability to read in data. Specify how this works.
21.3DES: interrupt. In the DES specification and block diagram, add an
input interrupt that stops DES computation. Be sure to specify the
values of the outputs on interrupt, the state the system goes into, and
what happens during the interruption of data input. How does
execution resume?
21.4DES: plaintext output. At the end of DES cracking, we would like to
output the plaintext data. Specify this feature and include it in the
partitioned block diagram.
21.5Music player: input song. In the music player specification and
simple block diagram, add the ability to input a song file into the
RAM.
21.6Music player: pause, stop buttons. Add the ability to stop and pause
playback of a song. Discuss where playback should begin when the
user again asserts the start signal.
21.7String searcher. Give a specification and partitioning of a string
searcher. Given three different sequences to find and a single long
string to search, your block should output the number of occurrences
of each search term.
21.8Elevator controller. Specify and partition an elevator controller. You
should take floor requests as inputs and output the door state (open or
closed), destination floor, and a signal to start the elevator moving.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 653 ---
22
Interface and system-level timing
System-level timing is generally driven by the flow of information
through the system. Because this information flows through the interfaces
between modules, system timing is tightly tied to interface specification.
Timing is determined by how modules sequence information over these
interfaces. In this chapter we will discuss interface timing and illustrate
how the operation of the overall system is sequenced via these interfaces,
drawing on the examples introduced in Chapter 21.
22.1 INTERFACE TIMING
Interface timing is a convention for sequencing the transfer of data. To
transfer a datum from a source module S to a destination module D, we need
to know when the datum is valid (i.e., when the source module S has
produced the datum and placed it on its interface pins) and when D is ready
to receive the datum (i.e., when D samples the datum from its interface
pins). We have already seen examples of interface timing in the interfaces
between the modules of factored state machines in Chapter 17. In the
remainder of this section, we look at interface timing in more depth.
22.1.1Always valid timing
As the name implies, an always valid signal (Figure 22.1), is always valid.
An interface with only always valid signals does not require any sequencing
signals.

--- Page 654 ---
Figure 22.1. An always valid interface requires no sequencing signals or flow control. The datum is
valid every cycle and can be sampled by the receiver at any time.
It is important to distinguish an always valid signal from a periodically
valid signal (Section 22.1.2) with a period of one clock cycle. An always
valid signal represents a value that can be dropped or duplicated. A
temperature sensor that constantly outputs an eight-bit digital value
representing the current temperature is an example of such a signal. We
could pass this signal to a module operating at twice the clock rate
(duplicating temperature signals) or a module operating at half the clock rate
(dropping temperature values), and the output of the module still represents
the current temperature (with perhaps a slight lag).
The state interfaces in the Pong game of Figure 21.2 are another example
of always valid interfaces. The mode, ballPos, leftPadY, rightPadY, and
score signals are all examples of always valid signals. Each of these signals
always represents the current value of a state variable.
Figure 22.2. A periodically valid interface transfers a datum once every N cycles. There is no flow
control, and values cannot be dropped or repeated. The figure shows a periodic signal with period N =
3.
A static or constant signal is a special case of an always valid signal
where the signal is guaranteed not to change values between specified events
(e.g., system resets). A static signal is even easier to deal with when crossing
clock domains. Because it doesn’t change during the period of interest, it
need not be synchronized at all.
22.1.2Periodically valid signals
A signal with periodically valid timing or periodic timing (Figure 22.2) is
valid once every N cycles. The interval N is the period of the signal. Unlike
an always valid signal, each value of a periodically valid signal represents a
particular event, task, or token, and cannot be dropped or duplicated. The key

--- Page 655 ---
output of the key-generator module in the DES cracker (Section 21.3.2) is an
example of a periodically valid interface (assuming that the nextKey input is
a periodic signal). A new key appears on this interface once every N cycles.
Each key represents a particular task (decrypt the ciphertext with this key)
and cannot be dropped or duplicated.1
A periodically valid signal with a period of 1 is valid every cycle but it is
not the same as an always valid signal because its values cannot be dropped
or duplicated. For example, suppose we design the DES cracker of Figure
21.3 so that the key generator produces a new key each cycle. This is a
periodically valid signal with a period of 1. We cannot drop or duplicate the
key values produced. Each must be considered exactly once.
Figure 22.3. With ready–valid flow control, a datum or token is passed between two modules only
when the sender indicates that the datum is valid and the receiver indicates that it is ready to receive
the datum. If either ready or valid is not asserted, no transfer takes place.
This distinction between always valid and periodically valid signals
becomes apparent when we move signals between clock domains (Chapter
29). It is easy to move always valid signals between clock domains as long
as we avoid synchronization failure because it is acceptable to duplicate or
drop values. On the other hand, flow control is required in order to move a
periodically valid signal with a period of one clock cycle across clock
domains.
Of course, with periodic signaling, the sending and receiving modules
must synchronize at some point – so that they agree on which cycle to start
counting to N. This is typically achieved by initializing counters in each
module on the transition out of reset.
Periodically valid interfaces tend to be brittle and in most cases should be
avoided in favor of interfaces with flow control (Section 22.1.3). Periodic
signaling violates modularity. If one needs to redesign a module to change
the value of N, all modules connected to this module need to change as well

--- Page 656 ---
– and may have trouble accommodating the new value. Using signaling with
flow control isolates changes in timing to one module.
22.1.3Flow control
An interface with flow control uses explicit sequencing signals, usually
called valid and ready, to sequence the transfer of data over the interface.
Figure 22.3 shows an interface that uses ready–valid flow control. The
sending module signals when a valid datum is present on the interface by
asserting valid. The receiving module indicates that it is ready to accept a
new datum by asserting ready. The datum is transferred only when both
valid and ready are asserted.
With a flow-controlled interface, the module (sender or receiver) that is
ready for the transfer first must wait for the other module before the transfer
takes place. In the first transfer in Figure 22.3, the sender waits for the
receiver. The sender puts A on the data lines and asserts valid in cycle 1, but
has to wait until the receiver signals ready in cycle 2 for the transfer to take
place. In the second transfer, the receiver waits for the sender. The receiver
asserts ready in cycle 4, but has to wait until the sender puts B on the data
lines and asserts valid in cycle 5.
With the ready–valid interface there is no need for either ready or valid to
go low between transfers. In the third transfer in the figure ready remains
high in cycle 6, but the receiver must wait for the sender to provide data and
assert valid in cycle 7. When both ready and valid remain high, a new datum
is transferred each cycle – as with D in cycle 8.
When one of the two modules is known always to be ready for a transfer,
one side of the ready–valid interface can be omitted. In the music player of
Figure 21.4, for example, the valid side of the flow control is omitted; only
the ready side of the flow control signaling is provided. The sending module
is assumed to provide valid data before ready (or next for the codec) is
asserted. This one-sided flow control, where transfers are controlled by the
receiver, is sometimes called pull timing because the receiver is pulling new
values by asserting ready.

--- Page 657 ---
Figure 22.4. Schematic for the flow-controlled register described in Example 22.1.
Similarly, a one-sided interface, where only the valid signals are provided
and the receivers are assumed to be ready before the next datum, is called
push timing because the sender pushes data through the system with valid
signals.
In some cases, the valid signal can be encoded in the data signal by using
an unused or invalid data code to imply not valid. When this convention is
used, the presence of a valid data code on the data signal implies valid. A
separate ready signal is always required because the receiver has no other
way of signaling whether it is able to accept a datum.
In some cases, it is advantageous to allow the sending module to get a few
data ahead of the receiving module. This can be accomplished by inserting a
FIFO buffer between the sender and the receiver. The FIFO provides a few
words of storage with a ready–valid interface both on its input and on its
output. Its output is valid unless it is empty, and its input is ready unless it is
full. We defer describing details of FIFOs until Chapter 23.
EXAMPLE 22.1 Flow-controlled registers
Design a register in which the input and output data uses flow-controlled signaling. Such a register can
be used to split long, high-delay wires that are on the critical path of the design.
Figure 22.4 shows the design of our module. The signals for communicating with the upstream
module are du (data input), ru (ready output), and vu (valid input); dd (output), rd (input), and vd
(output) transfer data downstream. When designing this module, we make it a point not to include any
combinational paths passing through our register. Doing so defeats the purpose of the module:
eliminating long delay paths.
Every cycle, when no valid data are stored (vd = 0), both the valid register and data are updated with
the upstream value. Our buffer also signals upstream that it is ready to accept new data (ru = 1). When
valid data are stored in the register (vd = 1), the data register is disabled, holding the stored value. If
the downstream unit is not ready, vd is held high and ru is kept low. When ready, the downstream unit
asserts rd, causing the vd to be deasserted on the next cycle. With only one register and no

--- Page 658 ---
combinational paths between stages, this module can accept new data only every other cycle. Exercise
22.6 asks you to make a version that doubles this data rate.
The always valid and periodically valid versions of this register comprise a D-flip-flop that is
updated on each clock edge with the most recent value. Designers must be aware that a periodic output
will be valid one cycle later with the register than without. This may require changing downstream
modules.
22.2 INTERFACE PARTITIONING AND
SELECTION
The data portion of an interface is often partitioned into a number of fields.
For example, in the Pong game of Figure 21.2, the model subsystem has an
output that includes five fields representing distinct state variables. At the
next level down, the Paddle FSM has an always valid interface with two data
fields, leftPadY and rightPadY. The Ball FSM outputs a single signal,
ballPos. However, this signal is logically divided into X and Y components,
ballPos.X and ballPos.Y.
In an interface with multiple data fields, often one field determines how
the remainder of the interface is interpreted. For example, in Figure 18.13
the first part of our microcode instruction is a field that determines how the
rest of the instruction is interpreted.
A common interface technique provides separate fields for control,
address, and data. The control and address fields of the interface are
selection fields. The control field selects the operation to be performed and
the address field selects which location the operation is performed on. For
example, in a memory system, the control field may specify one of read,
write, no-operation, refresh, set-parameter, and other operations. The
address field selects the location or parameter to be read, written, or
refreshed. The data field then provides (or receives) the data associated with
the operation. Both the data field and the selection fields are sequenced
using one of the timing conventions described in Section 22.1.
22.3 SERIAL AND PACKETIZED
INTERFACES

--- Page 659 ---
When an interface must transfer a large datum with a low duty factor, it may
be advantageous to serialize the datum, transferring it over many cycles, one
part per cycle over a narrower interface. For example, suppose an interface
transfers a 64-bit block of data once every four cycles. We can transfer this
block over a 16-bit interface by sending one-quarter of the block each cycle,
as shown in Figure 22.5. On the first cycle a3 (a(63 downto 48)) is
transferred, in the second cycle a2 is transferred, and so on.
Figure 22.5. A serialized interface passes data over a number of cycles. In this case, a frame signal
denotes the first cycle of each transfer, a form of push signaling.
With a serialized signal, there must be a convention for the sending and
receiving module to determine which cycle a transfer starts on. This can be
done using either flow control or periodically valid timing. Figure 22.5
shows an interface with one-way flow control that uses an explicit frame
signal to denote the first cycle of each transfer. This is an example of push
timing. The frame signal is a valid signal and the receiver is assumed to be
always ready. An explicit ready signal could be added to the interface if two-
way flow control is required.
With flow control, a transfer need not start every four cycles and need not
even start on a multiple of four cycles. In the example shown in Figure 22.5,
the link goes idle in cycle 9, because the transmitter has no data to send. The
transfer of datum c then starts in cycle 10. With explicit framing, the
transmitter need not wait until cycle 12, as would be required with
periodically valid timing.
The interface shown in Figure 22.5 is an example of nested timing with
push timing used at the frame level and periodic timing used at the cycle
level. Frame-level timing is determined by the one-way flow control using
the frame signal. However, once the frame has been started, the remaining
transfers take place each cycle (periodic timing with N = 1) with no flow
control. It is possible to use flow control at both levels of timing by using a
valid signal to sequence the subsequent words of a transfer as well. As long
as the frames are of fixed size, a single valid signal can be used both at the

--- Page 660 ---
frame level (for the first word of a transfer) and at the cycle level (for
subsequent words). If two-way flow control is required, a single ready signal
can be used for both levels.
Memory and I/O interfaces often serialize the command, address, and data
fields to transmit them over a shared, narrow bus, as shown in Figure 22.6.
In the figure a memory transaction is serialized over a byte-wide interface
over seven cycles with the control sent on the first cycle, the address sent
over two cycles, and data sent over four cycles. The example uses cycle-
valid/frame-ready flow control, with the frame signal indicating that an
entire frame of data is ready and the ready signal indicating receiver
readiness on a cycle-by-cycle basis. The receiver signals not ready during
cycle 6, causing data1 to be retransmitted in cycle 7.
Figure 22.6. A memory or I/O interface may be serialized to send the control, address, and data over a
shared bus. In this example, two-way flow control is used with frame, indicating a valid frame, and
ready, indicating receiver readiness on a cycle-by-cycle basis.
Serialized interfaces can be thought of as being packetized. Each item
transmitted is a packet of information containing many fields and possibly of
variable length. The packet is serialized for transmission over an interface of
a given width and deserialized on the far side. The width of the packet’s
fields have no relation to the width of the interface. The information
transmitted in a given cycle may include all or part of several fields, and a
given field may span multiple cycles.
The decision to serialize an interface or leave it parallel is based on cost
and performance. The advantage of a serialized interface is a reduction in the
number of pins or wires required for the interface. The disadvantages are an
increase in latency and the complexity of the serialization, deserialization,
and framing. On-chip, where the cost of additional wires is small, it is almost
always better to leave an interface wide – unless the signals being
transmitted were serialized to begin with. Off-chip, where chip pins and

--- Page 661 ---
system-level signals are expensive, interfaces are often serialized to keep the
duty factor of each pin close to unity.
EXAMPLE 22.2 Deserializer
Design a module that converts a one-bit wide data input into an eight-bit wide data output. Both the
input and the output use push flow control. The output is not valid until eight valid inputs (bits 0, 1, ...,
7) have been received.
Shown in Figures 22.7 and 22.8 are the VHDL and testbench output of our module. The general
idea is to write each incoming bit into the appropriate one of eight D-flip-flops (LSB first). We keep a
(one-hot encoded) count that keeps track of which bit is to be written next, shifting it each cycle the
input is valid. In the VHDL, we have registers to store three states:
(1) en_out: ann-bit long one-hot signal that encodes which bit of the deserializer is to be written
next;
(2) dout: the data itself, fed directly to the output (each individual flip-flop is enabled by the en_out
signal above);
(3) vout: if the output is valid this cycle (set the cycle after the eighth bit has been captured).
The output of our deserializer is shown in Figure 22.8, inputting words of all 1s, all 0s, and then all
1s. We can verify the timing of this module by comparing it with the timing table we specify in
Example 22.3.

--- Page 662 ---
Figure 22.7. VHDL design entity that implements a deserializer with push flow control for Example
22.2.

--- Page 663 ---
Figure 22.8. Set of outputs showing the verification of the VHDL of Example 22.2 and Figure 22.7.
22.4 ISOCHRONOUS TIMING
Some interfaces, such as an LCD display or an audio codec, require
isochronous timing. These devices have hard real-time constraints on timing
– requiring that each data element be delivered within a bounded window of
time to avoid missing a sample. The timing constraint can be thought of as
periodic timing with a margin – due to a FIFO. Sample i must be delivered
between cycle N(i − B) and cycle Ni, whereN is the period and B is the size
of the FIFO buffer. The interfaces themselves employ flow control – to allow

--- Page 664 ---
some variation in the timing – but they require that the flow-control signals
respond within the required timing interval.
The audio codec in the music player of Figure 21.4, for example, requires
isochronous timing. This is satisfied by using pull timing and ensuring that
the rest of the system responds more rapidly than required.
Isochronous timing can be challenging in a system that includes
arbitration for resources – particularly when the arbitration is between many
isochronous flows. The amount of time spent waiting for arbitration must be
bounded to prevent the worst-case delay from exceeding the timing
constraint.
22.5 TIMING TABLES
Since Chapter 14, we have been using timing diagrams such as Figure 22.6
to illustrate timing relationships. In these diagrams time advances from left
to right, and we show the evolution of each signal over time on the vertical
axis, either as a waveform, for binary signals, or with a set of values. While
timing diagrams are useful for visualizing binary signals for a few cycles,
when we are visualizing multi-bit signals the waveforms don’t help, and we
often need to see many more cycles.
In situations where we want to visualize more than a few cycles, or where
most signals are not binary, a timing table is more useful than a timing
diagram. Table 22.1 shows a timing table for the Huffman encoder ofSection
19.4.1 operating on the same input data as used for the simulation shown in
Figure 19.16.
Table 22.1. Timing table for the Huffman encoder ofSection 19.4.1 encoding the character string
“THE”
cycle rst irdy in char load count value oval out
  0 1 × × ×
  1 1 14 × × ×
  2 14 1 × ×
  3 14 3 0010000001 0
  4 1 08 14 2   010000001 0

--- Page 665 ---
  5 08 1 1 1¯0000001 1
  6 08 4 0110000001 0
  7 08 3   110000001 1
  8 1 05 08 2 1¯0000001 1
  9 05 1 1 0¸00000 1 0
10 05 3 1000000001 1
While the data are the same whether horizontal or vertical, it is easier to
interpret them as a table. Showing successive values of value one on top of
the other makes the shifting operation clearer. Also, the updating of state
from line to line is easier to follow. In a cycle during which irdy is asserted,
char takes on the value of in in the next row. Similarly, in a cycle during
which load is asserted, count and value are updated in the next row.
EXAMPLE 22.3 Deserializer timing table
Show a timing table for the deserializer of Example 22.2.
In Table 22.2, we show the deserializer operating over two iterations (data A and B). Every cycle
when the input is valid (ival), the counter (in a binary-weighted format) is incremented and the data
are stored into the appropriate bit position. On the cycle after the counter is 7 and the input data is
valid, the output valid signal (oval) is asserted.
Table 22.2. Timing table showing example execution of the deserializer of Example 22.2
cycle rst ival in count out oval
  0 1 × × × × ×
  1 0 1 A0 0 00000000 0
  2 0 1 A1 1 0000000A0 0
  3 0 1 A2 2 000000A1A0 0
 ... 0 1 A 0
  8 0 1 A7 7 0A6A5A4A3A2A1A0 0
  9 0 1 B0 0 A7A6A5A4A3A2A1A0 1
10 0 0 X 1 A7A6A5A4A3A2A1B0 0
11 0 1 B1 1 A7A6A5A4A3A2A1B0 0
12 0 1 B2 2 A7A6A5A4A3A2B1B0 0
 ... 0 1 B 0

--- Page 666 ---
18 0 0 X 0 B7B6B5B4B3B2B1B0 1
22.5.1Event flow
A timing table makes the event flow of a digital system clear. The event flow
is the sequence of events that through cause and effect drive the system
forward. For our Huffman encoder, the event flow is driven entirely off of
the counter. When the counter reaches 2, the encoder asserts irdy to load
another input character into the char register. When the counter reaches 1,
load is asserted, and the counter and shift register are loaded on the next
cycle with the bit string to encode the character.
For most non-trivial digital systems the event flow is driven from a key
interface and events are synchronized between modules with a ready–valid
interface.
22.5.2Pipelining and anticipatory timing
The Huffman encoder is an example of a pipeline (Chapter 23) that uses
anticipatory timing. Each input to the encoder passes through two pipeline
stages. If a character arrives at the input and irdy is asserted in cycle i, the
character appears at the output of the input register in cycle i+1, and the
length and bit string for that character are loaded into the counter and shift
register at the start of cycle i + 2.
Because of the two-cycle delay from input to output, the control logic
must anticipate the end of the current character’s bit string and assert irdy
two cycles in advance – when the value in the counter is 2–
toloadthenextcharacterintotheinput register. One cycle in advance – (when
the count is 1) it asserts the load signal to load the output of the ROM into
the counter and the shift register.
This anticipatory timing becomes more interesting when the pipeline is
longer and when the minimum length of an output string is 1.
22.6 INTERFACE AND TIMING EXAMPLES

--- Page 667 ---
We will now revisit our examples from Chapter 21 and examine their system
timing and interface timing.
22.6.1Pong
The bulk of the Pong system uses always valid timing. Each of the modules
in the center column of Figure 21.2 generates its portion of the global state.
The Ball FSM, for example, generates the X and Y coordinates of the current
time. These signals are always valid and can be sampled at any point in time.
Each FSM samples the state generated by the other FSMs to carry out its
function. For example, the Ball FSM uses the paddle positions from the
Paddle FSM to check for the ball hitting a paddle. Note that the clock must
be run fast enough (relative to the speed of the ball) that the ball does not
move more than one pixel in X or Y per clock cycle, so that key events –
such as the ball intersecting the top of the screen or hitting a paddle – won’t
be missed between time-steps. The VGA display module samples the always
valid state of the four FSMs as needed to generate the display.
The signals out of the input logic use single-ended flow control (push
timing). In contrast to the always valid signals that represent a continuous
state, these signals represent events. When a button is pressed, one of the
input signals serve, start, leftUp, leftDn, rightUp, or rightDn is asserted for
exactly one cycle – signaling an input event. Each of these signals can be
thought of as a valid signal with implied data. That is, these signals combine
flow control – signaling the event – and data – whether the event is a left
paddle up or a left paddle down – into a single signal. The Main FSM and
Paddle FSM respond to these events by updating their state.
22.6.2DES cracker
The timing for the DES cracker using a deterministic schedule is shown in
Table 22.3. The cracker has eight ciphertext blocks stored, a 16-cycle DES
descriptor, a one-cycle key generator, and a combinational plaintext checker.
Every 16 cycles, a new ciphertext block is decrypted. On the 128th cycle, a
new key is generated, and block 0 is again decrypted.
Table 22.3. In periodic DES timing, we decrypt all eight blocks of ciphertext before advancing to
the next key

--- Page 668 ---
The columns labeled FK, NK, FB, and NB refer to signals first_key,
next_key, first_block, and next_block, respectively.
Cycle FK NK Key FB NB CT block DES Check
  −1 1 1
0 key 0 block 0
1 round 1
2 round 2
 ... ...
  15 1 ...
  16 block 1 round 16
  17 round 1 PT block 0
  18 round 2
 ... ...
  31 1 ...
  32 block 2 round 16
  33 round 1 PT block 1
 ... ...
111 1 ...
112 block 7 round 16
113 round 1
... ...
127 1 1 ...
128 key 1 block 0 round 16
129 round 1 PT block 7
The event flow in this version of the DES cracker is driven entirely by a
series of counters in the master FSM block. These counters sequence timing
of the peripheral blocks to synchronize with the 16-cycle period of the DES
decrypt block. The individual blocks (the key generator, the cyphertext
storage, and the plaintext checker) operate with one-sided flow control (pull
timing) (Section 22.1.3). The signals first_key, next_key, first_block etc. are
ready signals indicating when the DES cracker has accepted the last input

--- Page 669 ---
produced by a block and that the block should advance to the next value.
These first/next signals are an example of combining a data signal with a
flow-control signal. They indicate both when the master FSM is ready for
the next value and whether the next value should reset to the beginning of
the sequence or advance to the next element of the sequence.
This system is another example of a pipeline with anticipatory timing. To
be able to start round 1 with a new key in cycle 129, we need to assert
next_key in cycle 127 so the key will be on the inputs of the DES unit in
cycle 128. Similar timing is needed for the first_block and next_block
signals.
We can greatly accelerate our DEC cracker by using a less rigid schedule
in which we advance to the next key as soon as we detect a plaintext block
that fails our plaintext check. Table 22.4 shows the timing of such a cracker.
Here the DES unit finishes decrypting ciphertext block 0 in cycle 16, with
the plaintext block appearing on its output in cycle 17. The plaintext checker
combinationally checks this block and signals that it is not plaintext during
cycle 17. We use this indication to assert next_key and first_block before the
end of cycle 17.2 The new key and block 0 appear on the inputs of the DES
unit in cycle 18. The start_DES signal (SD in the table) is asserted during
this cycle, interrupting the DES unit’s decryption of block 1, which is
already on round 2. If the majority of incorrect keys give a bad plaintext
block on the first ciphertext block, this optimization accelerates our cracker
by 7.1×. It reduces the time between keys from 128 cycles to 18 cycles.
Table 22.4. Modification of the DES cracker to move immediately to the next block when the
plaintext check fails
Cycle FK NK KGen FB NB CT SD DES Check
 −1 1 1
  0 key 0 block 0 1
  1 round 1
  2 round 2
 ... ...
 15 1 round 15
 16 block 1 1 round 16
 17 1 1 round 1 not PT

--- Page 670 ---
 18 key 1 block 0 1 round 2
 19 round 1
 20 round 2
 ... ...
 33 1 round 15
 34 block 1 1 round 16
 35 round 1 OK
The operation of the DES unit in cycles 17 and 18 is an example of
speculation. We don’t know in cycle 15 whether the last block is going to
pass the plaintext check. However, rather than wait around until cycle 17 to
find out, we assert next_block in cycle 15 and start_DES in cycle 16 to start
decrypting the next ciphertext block speculatively. We are speculating, that is
guessing, that the plaintext check will pass, and then proceeding with that
assumption. If the assumption is incorrect, as we discover in cycle 17, we
cancel the speculative work by reasserting start_DES in cycle 18, and we are
no worse off (time-wise3) than if we had waited to operate non-
speculatively. If the speculation is correct, as in cycle 35, we are two cycles
ahead of where we would have been if we had waited to operate non-
speculatively.
22.6.3Music player
We conclude with the isochronous music player of Figure 21.5. The event
flow for the music player is driven by the isochronous codec which requests
a new sample, via signal next every 20.83 μs (48 kHz). This is an example of
pull timing. The rest of the system has 2083 10 ns (100MHz) clocks to
provide this sample before the next request. There is no FIFO to buffer
samples before the codec, so the system must compute each sample in real
time.
Timing for the music player is shown in Table 22.5. Each block in the task
chain pulls signals from the block before using ready–valid flow control. In
cycle 0 the next signal from the codec is passed through the envelope module
and triggers the nextSample signal out of the Harmonics FSM. This signal
causes the sine-wave synthesizer to advance one time-step (20.83 μs) and
output the value of the fundamental frequency in cycle 2. The harmonic unit

--- Page 671 ---
responds by asserting nextHarmonic in cycle 3 to request the second
harmonic. The synthesizer replies with a valid signal in cycle 5. A similar
sequence returns the third harmonic in cycle 8. The hardware then idles until
the codec requests the next sample in cycle 2084.
Table 22.5. Timing table for the music player
Cycle next Samplenext Harmsine Valid next Note Comment
1 Next sample requested by
codec
1
1 1 Value of fundamental
1 Read second harmonic
1
1 1 Value of second harmonic
1 Read third harmonic
1
1 1 Value of third harmonic
... Idle until next 48 kHz
sample
2084 1 Read fundamental for next
sample
2085 1
2086 1 1 Value of fundamental
2087 1 Read second harmonic
2088 1
2089 1 1 Value of second harmonic
2090 1 Read third harmonic
2090 1
2091 1 1 Value of third harmonic
... Repeat 4800 times per note
X+6 1 Read third harmonic of last
sample of note
X+7 1

--- Page 672 ---
X+8 1 1 Value of third harmonic
X+9 1 Request next note
The nine cycles from cycle 2084 to 2091 repeat this sequence of
requesting the next sample and then two additional harmonics. This nine-
cycle sequence is repeated every 2084 cycles until the synthesizer has
determined that all of the samples for the current note have been provided.
After providing the third harmonic of the last sample of the current note, the
synthesizer requests the Note FSM to provide the next note in cycle X + 9.
The Note FSM has until cycle X + 2084 to provide the note.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to reason about the timing of signals
between modules and how to use timing tables to analyze system timing.
The simplest interfaces, like our Pong example, use always valid timing,
in which a signal can be sampled at any point in time. Modules that produce
one valid result every N cycles use periodic timing. Such timing tends to be
brittle – it breaks if any part of the system is changed or if an event that
requires a module to be restarted occurs.
More robust timing can be realized using flow control, inwhichaready
signal signals when a receiver can accept a value and a valid signal indicates
when a sender has a value to send. A value is passed when ready = valid = 1.
Flow control can be implemented unidirectionally or bidirectionally. A
unidirectional interface with a ready signal but no valid signal is said to use
pull timing. An interface with only a valid signal is said to use push timing.
A timing table is a useful tool to design and visualize the timing of a
system. These tables show time on the vertical axis with a separate row for
each cycle. Columns are devoted to key signals.
In systems with delay between a request and a response, anticipatory
timing – where the request is made several cycles before the response is
needed – can be used to compensate for the delay.
Much insight into system timing can be generated by following the event
flow – the cause and effect relationship between key timing signals. Event
chains are typically triggered by external events arriving at interfaces or by
the completion of bottleneck modules.

--- Page 673 ---
Exercises
22.1Always valid timing. Aside from sensors and games, give three other
examples of where always valid timing is used.
22.2Periodically valid timing. Aside from what was mentioned in the
text, give three examples of where periodically valid timing is used.
22.3Flow-controlled timing. Aside from what was mentioned in the text,
give three examples of where timing with flow control is used.
22.4Conversion to periodic timing. Design a VHDL design entity that
acts as a receiver for an interface with an eight-bit wide data signal
and ready–valid flow control and as a sender for an interface with
periodic timing with a period of N = 5. Explain how you handle the
case where your module is empty when the next period comes up.
22.5Conversion from periodic timing. Design a VHDL design entity for
receiving periodic (N = 10) eight-bit signals and outputting them to a
ready–valid interface. Your module should include the ability to save
up to two of the periodically valid signals if the output is not ready.
You may drop the third such packet.
22.6Fully utilized flow control. In Example 22.1, we designed a module
that can be used to buffer a ready–valid flow-controlled
communication channel. The problem with this, however, was that
we were able to accept new data only every other cycle. Design a
module that can accept a new value every cycle, enabling full
throughput. You are not allowed to have any combinational paths
from the downstream interface to the upstream interface (or vice
versa). You will need two registers to store incoming data.
22.7Credit-based flow control. Credit-based flow control is an alternative
to ready–valid signaling. The sending module starts with n credits.
On every cycle in which the module still has at least one credit
remaining, it can emit an eight-bit data signal and signal valid. The
receiver is guaranteed to capture this value. Sending valid data
subtracts one credit from the count of remaining credits. A
periodically valid (period of 1) signal from the receiver to the sender,
creditRtn, is used to “return” credits back to the sender. Every cycle
during which creditRtn is asserted, the sender increments the credit
count. Design and write VHDL for this credit-based sending module.

--- Page 674 ---
The inputs are an always valid eight-bit data signal, reset, and
creditRtn. The outputs are the valid signal and data.
22.8Serialization, I. Design a VHDL design entity to convert a 64-bit data
signal with periodic timing (eight-cycle period) into a series of eight-
bit signals with periodic timing (one-cycle period). You must store
the input data, since it can change to unknown values when it is not
considered to be valid.
22.9Serialization, II. Repeat Exercise 22.8, but instead assume that the
64-bit input uses ready–valid flow control. The output interface also
uses a ready–valid protocol, but at a frame granularity. When the
output signals ready and the input is valid, the input sends all eight
eight-bit packets in eight consecutive cycles. You are not allowed to
have a purely combinational path from the upstream to the
downstream interface (nor from the downstream to upstream
interfaces). What is the maximum utilization of the output?
22.10Frame and cycle-level flow control. Design a VHDL design entity
that receives a serialized signal over eight cycles using frame-level
flow control and acts as a sender for a serialized signal over eight
cycles using cycle-level flow control.
22.11 Isochronous timing and predictability. Describe three different
situations that can insert unpredictability into a system with an
isochronous timed output. For each reason, explain how you could
bound the worst case error.
22.12Timing tables, I. Draw a timing table for both of the serialized
interfaces described in Exercises 22.8 and 22.9.
22.13Timing tables, II. Convert the waveform of Figure 17.5 into a timing
table. Be sure to include all relevant signals.
22.14Timing tables, III. Draw a timing table for the Pong game described
inSection 22.6.1. You should start at cycle i with the ball in the
middle of the screen and moving directly left at a rate of one pixel
every 20 cycles. When the ball reaches the end of the grid, it should
register a score (assume the left paddle missed it). Finally, your
timing table should include the service of the ball and the beginning
of its movement rightward. Include all relevant state and control
signals.
22.15DES, faster speculation. A student observes that if a register is
provided to hold the old key, the new key can be produced during

--- Page 675 ---
cycle 1 in Table 22.4. Any subsequent start of a DES decryption
(indicated by asserting start_DES) can select between the two keys
using a multiplexer. Redraw the timing table of Table 22.4 assuming
this facility is available. What is the interval between keys if the first
plaintext block fails the plaintext check with this change?
22.16DES, speculate on failure. The speculation shown in Table 22.4
speculates on success. That is, it assumes the plaintext check of the
current block will succeed, and thus proceeds with anticipatory
timing to decrypt the next block with the same key. We can speculate
in the other direction as well. We can guess that the current block will
fail the plaintext check and assert new_key and first_block in cycle 15
of Table 22.4. If our speculation is correct, we proceed with the new
key with no delay. If our speculation is incorrect, we need to restore
the appropriate state.
(a) What state needs to be saved to allow us to recover from
incorrect speculation in this case?
(b) Adding a column for RS (restore state) to Table 22.4, redraw
this table to speculate on failure. Include the same two cases
where key 0/block 0 fails and then key 1/block 0 passes.
(c) Suppose the first plaintext block fails the plaintext check 95% of
the time. Is it faster overall to speculate on failure or to speculate
on success?
22.17DES with two-way flow control. Suppose we design an improved
plaintext checker that performs a two-step check of a decrypted block
to see whether it is valid plaintext. Step one takes one cycle and
rejects a block 95% of the time. However, if a block passes the first
step, a second step taking six additional cycles is employed, which
rejects 90% of the remaining blocks. Explain how to interface this
improved module to the DES system of Figure 21.3 and how it
affects system timing. Draw a timing table showing the timing of the
revised system. In your table include examples of both a fast reject
and a slow reject by the new module.
22.18DES, idle resources. In Table 22.3, our key generator is idle for 127
of 128 cycles. In order to utilize this resource fully, describe how you
can instantiate multiple DES decoders to run in parallel.
(a) Draw the new timing table with 128 different DES decoders.

--- Page 676 ---
(b) Repeat this exercise with the implementation shown in Table
22.4. How many parallel DES decoders does the system need?
1 Strictly speaking, we could duplicate keys – this would simply result in extra work as we attempt to
decrypt the ciphertext block multiple times with the same key.
2 The designer needs to check that using this status signal to generate control signals in the same
cycle does not lengthen the critical path. If it does, these signals should be deferred to cycle 18.
3 Speculation often has an energy penalty because the speculative work dissipates energy.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 677 ---
23
Pipelines
A pipeline is a sequence of modules, called stages, that each perform part
of an overall task. Each stage is like a station along an assembly line – it
performs a part of the overall assembly and passes the partial result to the
next stage. By passing the incomplete task down the pipeline, each stage
is able to start work on a new task before waiting for the overall task to be
completed. Thus, a pipeline may be able to perform more tasks per unit
time (i.e., it has greater throughput) than a single module that performs the
whole task from start to finish.
The throughput, or work done per unit time, of a pipeline is that of the
worst stage. Designers must load balance pipelines to avoid idling and
wasting resources. Stages that take a variable latency can stall all
upstream stages to prevent data propagating down the pipeline. Queues
can be used to make a pipeline elastic and tolerate latency variance better
than global stall signals.
23.1 BASIC PIPELINING
Suppose you have a factory that assembles toy cars. Assembling each car
takes four steps. In step 1 the body is shaped from a block of wood. In step 2
the body is painted. In step 3 the wheels are attached. Finally, in step 4, the
car is placed in a box. Suppose each of the four steps takes 5 minutes. With
one employee, your factory can assemble one toy car every 20 minutes. With
four employees your factory can assemble one car every 5 minutes in one of
two ways. You could have each employee perform all four steps – producing
a toy car every 20 minutes. Alternatively, you could arrange your employees

--- Page 678 ---
in an assembly line with each employee performing one step and passing
partially completed cars down to the next employee.
In a digital system, a pipeline is like an assembly line. We take an overall
task (like building a toy car) and break it into subtasks (each of the four
steps). We then have a separate unit, called a pipeline stage (like each
employee along the assembly line), performing each task. The stages are tied
together in a linear manner so that the output of each unit is the input of the
next unit – like the employees along the assembly line passing their output
(partially assembled cars) to the next employee down the line.
The throughput, Θ, of a module is the number of problems a module can
solve (or tasks a module can perform) per unit time. For example, if we have
an adder that is able to perform one add operation every 10 ns, we say that
the throughput of the adder is 100Mops (million operations per second). The
latency, T, of a module is the amount of time it takes the module to complete
one task from beginning to end. For example, if our adder takes 10 ns to
complete a problem from the time the inputs are applied to the time the
output is stable, its latency is 10 ns. Latency is just another word for delay.
For a simple module, throughput and latency are reciprocals of one another:
Θ = 1/T. If we accelerate modules through pipelining or parallelism,
however, the relation becomes more complex.
Suppose we need to increase the throughput of a module with T = 10 ns,
Θ = 100Mops, by a factor of 4. Furthermore, suppose the module is already
highly optimized so that we are unlikely to get much increase in throughput
by redesigning the module. Just as with our toy car factory, we have two
basic options. First, we could build four copies of our module, as shown in
Figure 23.1(a). Modules A–D are identical copies of our original module.
The distribute block distributes problems to the four modules, and the join
block combines the results. Here we can start four copies of our problem in
parallel as shown in Figure 23.2(a). Our latency is still T = 10 ns because it
still takes 10 ns to complete one problem from beginning to end. Our
throughput, however, has been increased to Θ = 400Mops since we are able
to solve four problems every 10 ns.

--- Page 679 ---
Figure 23.1. Throughput of a module can be increased by (a) using parallel copies of the module, or
(b) pipelining a single copy of the module.
An alternative method of increasing throughput is to pipeline a single
copy of the module, as shown in Figure 23.1(b). Here we have taken a single
module A and divided it into four parts A1, ..., A4. We assume that we were
able to do this partition evenly so that the delay of each of the four
submodules Ai is TAi = 2.5 ns. (Such an even division of modules is not
always possible, as discussed in Section 23.6.) Pipeline registers between
stages hold the result of the preceding submodule for one problem, freeing
that submodule to begin working on the next problem. Thus, as shown in
Figure 23.2(b), this pipeline can operate on four problems at once in a
staggered fashion. As soon as submodule A1 finishes work on problem P1, it
starts working on P2, while A2 continues work on P1. Each problem
continues down the pipeline, advancing one stage each clock cycle, until it is
completed by module A4. If we ignore (for now) register overhead, our
latency is still T = 10 ns (2.5 ns × 4 stages) and our throughput has been
increased to 400 Mops. The system completes a problem every 2.5 ns.

--- Page 680 ---
Figure 23.2. Timing diagram showing execution of four problems P1, ..., P4onthe parallel and
pipelined configurations of Figure 23.1.
Compared with using parallel modules, pipelining has the advantage that
it multiplies throughput without the cost of duplicating modules. Pipelining,
however, is not without its own costs. First, pipelining requires inserting
registers between pipeline stages. In some cases, these registers can be very
expensive. Also, a pipelined implementation has more register delay
overhead than a corresponding parallel design.
As an example of register overhead, suppose each register has a total
overhead treg = ts + tdCQ + tk = 200 ps. For a single module or a parallel
combination (Figure 23.1(a)), we pay this overhead once only, increasing
our latency to T = 10.2 ns and reducing the throughput of four parallel
modules to Θ = 4/10.2 = 392 Mops. Pipelining the module, on the other
hand, incurs the register overhead once per stage. Thus the latency is
increased to T = 10.8 ns and the throughput is reduced to Θ = 1/2.7 = 370
Mops.
In practice, many systems use parallel pipelined modules. Designers often
pipeline a module until the register overhead becomes expensive, obtaining
further throughput increases by using multiple copies of the pipelines
working in parallel. In general, if we are replicating a module with latency
Tm, throughput Θm, and area am p times, this gives
(23.1)
(23.2)
a = p(am + areg). (23.3)

--- Page 681 ---
The same module pipelined into n stages yields
T = Tm + ntreg, (23.4)
(23.5)
a = am + nareg. (23.6)
EXAMPLE 23.1 Simple pipelining
Calculate the throughput, latency, and clock period of a module that has a 10 ns delay per unit of
work. Assume flip-flops at the input and output with treg = 100 ps. Repeat this for a 10× replication
and a ten-stage pipeline.
The baseline module has
Replicating the module 10× (Equations (23.1) and (23.2)) yields
Pipelining the module into ten stages (Equations (23.4) and (23.5)) yields
23.2 EXAMPLE PIPELINES

--- Page 682 ---
Figure 23.3 shows three examples of how pipelines are applied to digital
systems.
Figure 23.3. (a) Graphics pipeline; (b) processor pipeline; (c) packet processing pipeline.
A graphics pipeline (Figure 23.3(a)) renders a sequence of triangles from
a scene, compositing the rendered fragments into a frame buffer, from which
they are displayed. The triangles go through a series of transformations to
filter out unseen objects and light others. Triangles are then broken into
fragments, shaded, and composited into the frame buffer – depending on
their depth and transparency. Graphics pipelines must have high throughput

--- Page 683 ---
to render complex scenes with complex shaders at 60 frames per second (16
ms per frame) or faster.
The shading stage of the pipeline uses parallelism to hide the latency of
texture accesses. For each fragment, one or more accesses are made into the
texture cache. Often, this access is a hit and completes quickly. A miss,
however, takes a long time to come back from memory. In order to avoid
paying this penalty for every fragment, GPUs launch multiple requests at the
same time. The multiple requests hide the latency of the texture access by
providing other useful work to do whilst waiting. As each texture returns
from the memory subsystem, it is matched to its requesting fragment and
proceeds through the pipeline. The matching must be done in a manner that
maintains the original ordering of the fragments because compositing must
take place in order to obtain the correct final image. By parallelizing texture
retrieval, the overall throughput of the GPU is increased.
Pipelining is also applied to increase the throughput of modern processors.
In a simple five-stage pipeline, shown in Figure 23.3(b), an instruction is
fetched from memory in the first stage. Next, the registers are read in the
second stage and operands are passed into the third stage, which performs an
arithmetic operation. If needed, memory is accessed in the fourth stage.
Finally, the result of the instruction is written back into the register file.
In a CPU pipeline, both the instruction fetch stage and memory stage can
cause accesses to a shared level-two cache (Section 25.4). If such a conflict
occurs, the memory access stage will typically win arbitration.1 Giving
priority to the downstream stage avoids a potential deadlock situation. The
register file in a CPU pipeline is shared between the register read and
writeback stages. However, each stage has exclusive access to one or more
register ports. The register read stage accesses the two read ports of the
register file while the writeback stage has exclusive access to the write port.
Care must still be taken to avoid reading a value from the register file before
it has been written, since an earlier instruction reaches the writeback stage
after a later instruction accesses the register file in the read stage.
Network routers, Figure 23.3(c), are also pipelined with parallel pipelines
for all input and output ports connected by a central switch. Bits coming off
of serial communication channels are aligned and formed into words by a
framer and grouped into packets. The next block polices packets, making
sure they are in compliance with their use agreement. This stage may drop
misbehaving packets and may assign priority to other packets according to

--- Page 684 ---
their assigned quality of service. In the next stage a routing calculation is
performed to determine the output port for each packet. This calculation
often involves a prefix search in a trie data structure and may take a variable
amount of time. Once an output port has been selected, a switch scheduler
stage assigns each word of the packet a timeslot for traversing the switch to
the desired output port. The stages in the output pipeline schedule the packet,
on the basis of its priority, for transmission over the output channel.
Because some of these pipeline stages can take variable amounts of time,
they are connected by FIFO buffers to average out the load and allow the
input to continue to accept packets while waiting on a downstream stage. We
will study these buffers in more detail in Section 23.7.
Each pipeline is carefully designed to meet latency, throughput, and cost
goals. Partitioning is done both to balance the load between pipeline stages
and to minimize the width of pipeline registers. Graphics pipelines are
replicated many times on a graphics processing unit (GPU) in order to
achieve desired throughput. CPUs tend to have long pipelines (around 20
stages) for high performance.
23.3 EXAMPLE: PIPELINING A RIPPLE-
CARRY ADDER
As a more concrete example of pipelining, consider a 32-bit ripple-carry
adder, as shown in Figure 23.4 and described in detail in Section 10.2. If
each full-adder module has a delay from carry-in to carry-out of tdcc = 100
ps, then in the worst case (where the carry must propagate all the way from
the LSB to the MSB), the delay of the adder is tdadd = 32tdcc = 3.2 ns. This
single adder is capable of performing one add every 3.2 ns for a throughput
of 312.5 million adds per second. Suppose our goal is to achieve a
throughput of one billion adds per second – starting a new add every 1 ns.
We can pipeline this adder to achieve this goal.

--- Page 685 ---
Figure 23.4. A 32-bit ripple-carry adder. If each stage requires 100 ps, an add can be performed in 3.2
ns.
In operation, only a single bit of this adder is busy at any point in time.
For example, 1 ns after the inputs are applied only bit 10 is active. Bits 0–9
have completed operation, and bits 11–31 are waiting on their carry inputs.
(They have computed p and g, but cannot compute s until the carry input is
available.) By pipelining the adder n ways, we can get n of the 32 bits
working at once.
The first step in pipelining a unit is to divide it into submodules. Figure
23.5 shows our 32-bit adder module divided into four submodules, each of
which performs an eight-bit add. Each eight-bit adder accepts an eight-bit
slice of each input vector, ai+7:i and bi+7:i, along with a carry-in ci and
generates an eight-bit slice of the sum si+7:i and a carry-out ci+8. The delay
(from carry-in to carry-out) of each of these eight-bit adders is td8 = 8tdcc =
800 ps, so it will fit in a 1 ns clock cycle, leaving 200 ps for register
overhead.

--- Page 686 ---
Figure 23.5. Dividing the 32-bit ripple-carry adder into four eight-bit adders.
To allow our partitioned adder to work on multiple problems at the same
time, we insert pipeline registers between the submodules. The thicker lines
in Figure 23.6 show where the registers are to be inserted. The circuit,
redrawn after inserting the registers, is shown in Figure 23.7. The
combination of a submodule and its register is referred to as a pipeline stage.
Pipeline register R1 is inserted after the first eight-bit adder. This register
captures the partial result of the add after 800 ps – this includes the low eight
bits of the sum sR07:0, bit 8 of the carry c8R0, and the upper three bytes of
the input vectors aR031:8 and bR031:8, for a total of 57 bits.

--- Page 687 ---
Figure 23.6. To pipeline the 32-bit ripple-carry adder, we insert registers to separate the stages at
locations shown by the thick, gray lines. All paths from input to output must pass through each
pipeline register.
Figure 23.7. Pipelined 32-bit ripple-carry adder. Registers have been inserted and the schematic
redrawn to make each pipeline stage one vertical region. Signal names are augmented with the name
of the pipeline register producing them.

--- Page 688 ---
We label all signals before R1 (including the primary inputs) with the
suffix R0 todenote that they are in the zeroth pipeline stage and to
distinguish these signals from signals in other pipeline stages. In a similar
manner, the outputs of R1, and all other signals in the first pipeline stage, are
labeled with a suffix R1. Note that signals sR17:0 and sR27:0 are different
signals. While they are both the low byte of a sum, at any point in time they
are the low bytes of different sums. By labeling signals with their pipeline
stage, we can easily spot the common pipeline error of combining signals
from different stages. We know that an expression fooR1 & barR2 is an error
because signals from different pipeline stages should not be combined.2
The second stage of the pipeline adds the second byte of data aR115:8 and
bR115:8, using c8R1 as the carry-in, giving sR115:8 and c16R1. The outputs of
this second byte adder are captured by R2, along with sR17:0, aR131:16, and
bR131:16, a total of 49 bits. In a similar manner, the third and fourth pipeline
stages add the third and fourth bytes of data. At the output of the fourth
stage, register R4 captures the full 32-bit sum sR331:0 and the carry-out
c32R3. The output of R4 is the result of the add s31:0 and c32.
The timing of the pipeline is illustrated in the pipeline diagram of Figure
23.8. The figure shows five problems, P0, ..., P4, proceeding down the
pipeline. Problem Pi enters the pipeline on cycle i. Bytej (bits 8j + 7:8j) of
the sum of Pi is computed during cycle i + j. The result of the add for
problem Pi appears on the output four clock cycles later, on cycle i + 4. At
the time at which the result for a problem P0 appears on the output during
cycle 4, four subsequent problems are in process in the various pipeline
stages.


--- Page 689 ---
Figure 23.8. Pipeline diagram showing the timing of the pipelined 32-bit ripple-carry adder. The
diagram illustrates on which cycle each sum byte of problems P0, ..., P4is computed.
Pipelining our ripple-carry adder has increased both its throughput and its
latency. If we assume that the register overhead treg = ts + tdCQ + tk is 200 ps
for each register, then the delay of each pipeline stage is 1 ns (800 ps for the
eight-bit adder and 200 ps for register overhead). Hence we can operate our
pipeline at 1 GHz, achieving our throughput goal of Θ = 1 Gops. The latency
of our pipeline is T = 4 ns, compared with the original 3.2 ns for the
unpipelined adder. The difference is the overhead of the four registers.
In general, if the delay of the combinational logic in the longest pipeline
stage is tmax,then the total delay of a pipeline stage is given by
tpipe = tmax + treg = tmax + ts + tdCQ + tk. (23.7)
From tpipe we see that the latency of n stages is given by
T = n (tmax + treg) = n (tmax + ts + tdCQ + tk), (23.8)
and the throughput is given by
(23.9)
23.4 PIPELINE STALLS
In some situations, a pipeline stage may not be able to complete its work in
the allotted amount of time. For example, in the toy factory, the wheel
assembler at the toy plant may drop a wheel. In a processor pipeline, some of
the inputs to a computation may not be ready. In either case, the offending
pipeline stage must notify all upstream stages of its failure to complete the
work. This is done via a big red button in a factory and a stall signal in a
digital system. Asserting such a signal halts upstream pipeline stages until it

--- Page 690 ---
is deasserted. Alternatively, we can use a ready signal and set it to 0 (not
ready) on a stall condition. This is similar to the ready–valid flow-control
mechanism of Section 22.1.3.
In a digital system without a stall signal, the register feeding the stalled
stage would still clock in new inputs. The incoming data would overwrite
the previous inputs, and the stalling task would be lost. Each register bank
includes logic that will not clock in new data if ready is deasserted.
Downstream, when a stall occurs, we still clock the flip-flops, but deassert a
control signal (valid) indicating that the result of the previous stage is
invalid.
These stall signals tend to be on the critical path, as shown in Figure
23.9(a). Often the assertion of a stall signal does not occur until late in the
pipeline stage. Once computed, these signals must propagate up the length of
the pipeline (wire delay) and combine with other stall signals (logic delay).
The valid signals are not on the critical path, since they are fed into the
register only at the end of a stage.

--- Page 691 ---
Figure 23.9. Three-stage pipeline with (a) stall signals, (b) stall logic, and (c) sample execution. If a
stage has a stalling condition, it will deassert its ready signal (rRi). This combines with all other ready
signals upstream to prevent pipeline registers from clocking in new data. When stage 3 is not ready in
cycle 2, all upstream pipeline stages immediately stall until stage 3 becomes ready.
The logic at each pipeline register to handle a stall, Figure 23.9(b), is
relatively simple. If the ready signal is set to 0, the register re-clocks its old
value. If the downstream stages are all ready, then the next task becomes
input to the register.
Figure 23.9(c) shows an example of a four-stage pipeline where a stall
occurs during cycle 2 at stage 3. The ready signal will be set to 0 and values
from computation B and C will not propagate. The output of stage 2 will

--- Page 692 ---
advance to the next stage, but the valid bit will be set to 0. We note this in
the diagram as XA.
The VHDL for a stalling pipeline buffer is shown in Figure 23.10. Its
inputs are the upstream_data, upstream_valid, and downstream_ready
signals. The ready signal is immediately propagated upstream while the
other two inputs are clocked into registers when no stall condition exists. If
the pipeline does need to stall, the registers will hold their outputs.
Figure 23.10. The VHDL for a single buffer. The downstream ready signal is propagated upstream via
combinational logic. If the downstream stages are not ready, the register does not clock in a new value.

--- Page 693 ---
23.5 DOUBLE BUFFERING
The problem with a global stall signal is one of delay. In many systems it is
infeasible to broadcast the stall condition in one cycle. Instead, we must
clock the ready signal into a flip-flop at every stage and propagate it
upstream one cycle at a time. To do so without losing data, we must double
buffer, holding in the register both the old data and the new data arriving
until the upstream stage can be stopped.
Figure 23.11(a) shows an example of a double-buffered pipeline. Between
every stage are two registers, Figure 23.11(b). When a pipeline stage i
becomes not ready, it sets the internal ready signal to 0. This causes the
values coming from stage i − 1 to be buffered into the second of two
registers (stage i−1 has not received the not ready signal). On the next cycle,
stage i−1 input prev_readyi is set to 0, causing readyi−1 to be zero.

--- Page 694 ---
Figure 23.11. (a) Three-stage pipeline with double buffering; (b) the buffer logic; (c) sample
execution. In a double-buffered pipeline, each stall signal propagates back only to the beginning of the
stage. This will reduce the latency of a system by removing the stall from the critical path. Stalling
causes a second register to be written, propagating the change in ready status (r) upstream one stage at
a time.
The logic for controlling the two buffers is shown in Figure 23.11. When
stage i has been ready for more than two cycles, both readyR_i and
prev_readyi are 1. This causes dRi−1 to be written into RegA every cycle. In
the first cycle during which either int_readyRi or prev_readyi+1 is asserted,
RegA does not clock in new data, and RegB buffers data from the upstream
stage. In the subsequent cycles until stage i becomes ready, both RegA and

--- Page 695 ---
RegB hold their values. In the first cycle after the ready signal has again
been asserted, the contents of register B will be promoted to register A.
In the execution example of Figure 23.11(c), stage 3 causes a stall at cycle
2. The registers between stages 0–1 and stages 1–2 have not received this
signal and clock in data D and C as normal. To avoid losing datum B, it is
buffered into the extra register between stages 2–3. On the next cycle, the
not ready signal is available at stage 2, double buffering D (since E is
clocked into the register at the end of stage 1). When the ready signal is
reasserted, it too will propagate upstream. Stage 3 will execute A and B
before C is clocked into its primary register. This type of buffering is also
called a skid buffer because the data skid to a halt into each of the double
buffers.
Double buffering can decrease the latency and increase the throughput of
systems. On removing the stall signal from the critical paths, modules run
faster. The additional registers impose an area overhead compared with a
global stall signal.
We have provided the VHDL code for a synchronous double buffer in
Figure 23.12. When the ready signal remains high, the first register (data_a)
clocks in the incoming values. Unlike the single buffer, we propagate the
ready signal through a flip-flop. When the system is not ready, the upstream
data are stored in the second register (data_b).

--- Page 697 ---
Figure 23.12. VHDL for a double buffer. The downstream_ready signal is propagated upstream after
one cycle. If the downstream stages are not ready, the second buffer (data_b) clocks in the upstream
value. Once the stages have again become ready, data_b is shifted into data_a.
A waveform showing the juxtaposition of the two buffer types is
displayed in Figure 23.13; data0–data4 represent the inputs to their
respective stages of the pipeline. After some time, we force the stage 3 ready
signal to be low. In the single-buffer case (top), this is a globally visible
event. All stages stop clocking in new data. With double buffering, we see
that the change in ready stages flows upstream one clock at a time. At each
stage, the second buffer (data_ib) clocks in the upstream data. After the
stage has become ready again, this buffered data is shifted into the first
buffer.

--- Page 698 ---
Figure 23.13. Waveform of a single- and double-buffered pipeline with stalls. We set the
stage3_ready signal to 0 and hold it for two cycles. The single buffer causes a global stall (readyi)
and no data are clocked into the buffers. With double buffering, the ready signal propagates a cycle at
a time. The signal dataib represents the value stored in the second buffer.
EXAMPLE 23.2 Double buffering to reduce delay
Compute the cycle time for a ten-stage pipeline with single buffers and with double buffers. Assume
that each stage has a 10 ns delay (including treg) and that the stall condition is evaluated 8 ns into the
cycle (trdy). It takes 1 ns to propagate a ready signal from one end of a pipeline stage to the other (tsd).
This delay must be incurred even by the stage that generated the stall condition.
With single buffering, the clock period is given by
Tclk = max(Tstage, trdy + ntsd) = max(10, 8 + 10 × 1) = 18 ns.

--- Page 699 ---
With double buffering, ready signals traverse only a single pipeline stage:
Tclk = max(Tstage, trdy + tsd) = max(10, 8 + 1) = 10 ns.
23.6 LOAD BALANCE
When designing a pipeline, it is important to ensure that each stage has equal
throughput because the overall throughput of the system is determined by
the slowest stage. The pipeline stage with the lowest throughput is often
called the bottleneck stage because, like the narrow neck of a bottle, it limits
the flow. Faster stages upstream from the bottleneck must idle to prevent
overflowing buffers. Faster stages downstream from the bottleneck must idle
because they lack input data much of the time.
Figure 23.14(a) shows an unbalanced pipeline. Each stage other than stage
3 has a throughput Θ =1 Gops. Stage 3, however, has only Θ3 = 250 Mops.
The throughput of the entire system is thus limited to 250 Mops. The clock
period is set to 4 ns, while the latency of the entire module is 16 ns.

--- Page 700 ---
Figure 23.14. Total throughput, latency, and clock times for three implementations of the same
pipeline. In (a), stage 3 limits the overall throughput. We pipeline stage 3 into four 1 ns stages in (b),
achieving full throughput and low latency. By replicating stage 3 in (c), the full 1 Gops throughput is
obtained, but not the fast latency. In (c), all other stages must produce four outputs per 4 ns clock
cycle.
To increase the throughput of stage 3 to match the rest of the pipeline (1
Gops), we can make four copies of it (Figure 23.14(c)), pipeline it four deep
(Figure 23.14(b)), or some combination of the two. Pipelining stage 3 allows
each stage to produce a new output every 1 ns. The latency of stage 3 as a
whole remains at 4 ns (plus register overhead), but the throughput has
increased fourfold. If stage 3 cannot be pipelined efficiently, we can replicate
it. Doing so requires that the system clock be set to 4 ns, the latency of stage
3. To achieve full 1 Gops throughput, every other stage must be able to
produce four results in a 4 ns cycle. Exercise 23.17 asks you to design a
pipeline where stage 3 is replicated and the cycle time is 1 ns.

--- Page 701 ---
23.7 VARIABLE LOADS
The delay of a pipeline stage need not always be constant. For example, the
time it takes to decode a frame of a movie depends on the difference
between the current and the previous frame. With a rigid pipeline, the
upstream stages will be stalled each time a downstream stage takes an
excessive amount of time to process one problem instance. However, by
inserting first-in-first-out (FIFO, see Section 29.4) buffers between the
pipeline stages, variation in throughput can be averaged out – making the
full throughput dependent only on the average throughput of each stage.
An upstream pipeline stage inserts results into the FIFO unless it is full.
The downstream stage takes problem instances from the head of the queue
unless it is empty. If the queue becomes full, the upstream stage stalls. On an
empty queue, the downstream stage idles.
In this type of decoupled system, a global clock need not exist. Each stage
of the pipeline computes until either the upstream queue is empty or the
downstream queue is full. In the steady-state condition, neither of these
should occur. To provide full throughput, queues must be deep enough to
accommodate all uncertainty between stages. Factors in queue sizing include
latency distribution and burstiness.
Figure 23.15 shows the need for queuing with variable latencies. Pipeline
stage A has a latency of ten cycles, whereas stage B has a latency of either
five or 15 cycles. With only a single pipeline latch between the two stages,
as in (b), A must stall whenever B has not completed its work on the
previous iteration (condition F). B must idle when the single buffer has not
yet been written by A (condition E). With a buffer with multiple slots, shown
in (c), stage A continuously executes without stalling – it simply queues up
problem instances if B is still busy. As long as the queue doesn’t become
empty, B does not idle. The only time B would idle is if it had a burst of five
cycle executions and drained the queue completely.

--- Page 702 ---
Figure 23.15. Pipelines with variable loads. Pipeline stage B can take either five or 15 cycles. In (b)
only a single register sits between A and B. This causes A to stall when A has completed but B has not
(F), and B to idle when B has completed but A has not (E). Replacing the register with a FIFO, as in
(c), eliminates the stalls.
As a detailed example of decoupling variable pipeline stages, consider the
waveform of Figure 23.16. A three-entry FIFO separates the fixed-latency
stage A from the variable-latency stage B. The FIFO interfaces with both
stages using ready–valid flow control (Section 22.1.3). From the FIFO,
signal A_ready represents not-full and B_valid represents not-empty. When
stage A asserts its valid signal and the FIFO is ready, the datum from A is
written into the FIFO on the rising clock edge. The datum is written into the
first available register, called the tail. When the FIFO is full in cycles 11, 12,
and 13, stage A must stall. When stage B asserts its ready signal and the

--- Page 703 ---
FIFO is valid, the FIFO will pop the queue and shift the rest of the data. The
FIFO continuously outputs the first valid datum, called the head of the
queue. When the FIFO is empty in cycles 1, 2, and 4, stage B idles. The
FIFO should be sized to limit the number of cycles stage A spends stalled
and stage B spends idling.
Figure 23.16. Waveforms when a FIFO queue is used as a buffer between variable-length pipeline
stages. When the queue is empty (B_valid = 0), B idles. Stage A stalls when the queue becomes full
(A_ready = 0).
EXAMPLE 23.3 Variable-load timing
Compute the time it takes for a four-stage pipeline to complete the five tasks shown in Table 23.1.
Shown in the table is the amount of time (in cycles) it takes each stage to complete a given problem.
For example, it takes stage 3 ten cycles to complete problem 1 but one cycle to complete problem 2.
Complete this example once assuming a global stall signal, and again assuming FIFOs between each
stage.
Table 23.1. Timing for the problem described in Example 23.3: each row represents one unit of
work, and the cells are the number of cycles each problem must take in a given pipeline stage
S1 S2 S3 S4
P1 1 1 10 1
P2 1 1 1 1
P3 1 1 1 10

--- Page 704 ---
P4 1 10 1 1
P5 10 1 1 1
We will draw timing tables for each implementation. Note that, in these tables, time is labeled
vertically, not horizontally. Each entry is the problem currently being computed at each stage. First, for
a global stall, we have Table 23.2. Next, with FIFOs, we have Table 23.3.
Table 23.2. Execution timing for the series of problems in Example 23.3: with a global stall
signal, execution takes 35 cycles
Cycle S1 S2 S3 S4
0 P1
1 P2 P1
2 P3 P2 P1
. . . P3 P2 P1
11 P3 P2 P1
12 P4 P3 P2 P1
13 P5 P4 P3 P2
. . . P5 P4 P3 P2
22 P5 P4 P3 P2
23 P5 P4 P3
... P5 P4 P3
32 P5 P4 P3
33 P5 P4
34 P5
Table 23.3. Execution timing for the series of problems in Example 23.3: with FIFOs used to
tolerate variable load, execution takes 26 cycles
Cycle S1 S2 S3 S4
0 P1
1 P2 P1
2 P3 P2 P1
3 P4 P3 P1
4 P5 P4 P1
. . . P5 P4 P1

--- Page 705 ---
11 P5 P4 P1
12 P5 P4 P2 P1
13 P5 P4 P3 P2
14 P5 P4 P3
15 P5 P3
16 P3
... P3
23 P3
24 P4
25 P5
The FIFO-based implementation is better able to handle the variable latency and runs the workload
in 26 cycles instead of 35.
23.8 RESOURCE SHARING
An expensive but lightly used resource may be shared between pipeline
stages. For example, in Figure 23.17(a), stages A and D of the pipeline
access memory. The memory is expensive andisusedlessthan50% of the time
by each stage, making sharing attractive. Figure 23.17(b) shows two
pipelines that share a module to compute the cosine of value, a very
infrequent operation.

--- Page 706 ---
Figure 23.17. Resource sharing between pipeline stages (a) and between pipelines (b).
An arbiter (Section 8.5) is used to prevent more than one sharer from
accessing the resource at any given time. For each resource cycle, sharers
needing the resource assert a request line. The arbiter grants the resource to
at most one requester. A sharer that loses arbitration must stall until it is
granted the resource. To prevent one requester from being starved
(repeatedly losing), a fair arbiter, such as a round-robin arbiter (see Exercise
8.13), should be used. Priority arbiters are used when one stage or pipeline is
more critical than the other. For example, granting permission to
downstream stages will cause fewer stages to stall than granting an upstream
stage access and avoids a potential deadlock issue. A variable number of

--- Page 707 ---
cycles may be spent arbitrating for a shared resource – sometimes enough to
warrant placing FIFOs before sharing stages.
Resource sharing is most beneficial in cases where a resource is lightly
used or costly to replicate. In a router, for example, the routing logic
calculates where a packet must be sent. It is used only once per packet, at the
header, but packets may take dozens of cycles to traverse the router. This
routing logic may be shared across multiple or even all input ports of the
router because of its low utilization.
Summary
In this chapter you have learned how to use pipelining and parallelism to
increase the performance of a module of your system. We measure the
performance of a module in terms of its latency and its throughput.
Pipelining involves dividing a module into a number of stages so that
information flows in one direction from one stage to the next. Registers are
inserted between the stages so that each stage can work on a separate
instance of a problem at the same time.
Either parallelism or pipelining can be used to increase throughput while
holding latency roughly constant. Pipelining a module n stages deep to first
approximation increases its throughput by a factor of n while increasing
latency only slightly (by ntreg) and increasing area (cost) by only the cost of
the inserted registers. In contrast, applying n parallel units also increases
throughput by a factor of n, but at a cost of an n× increase in area.
A pipeline stage that cannot complete its task in the allotted time for a
stage may stall the pipeline, halting all upstream stages until it completes its
work. The timing difficulty associated with stalling an entire pipeline can be
avoided by double buffering, in which the registers between stages are
replaced by buffers capable of holding two (or more) entries.
An efficient pipeline must be balanced, with each stage having equal
throughput, because the throughput of the overall pipeline will be set by the
slowest, bottleneck stage. To balance a pipeline we can apply pipelining or
parallelism to the bottleneck stage to increase its throughput.
When pipeline stages have variable throughput, FIFO buffers may be
inserted between stages to average out the variation. If the buffers are

--- Page 708 ---
sufficiently deep, this gives a throughput that is equal to the average
throughput of the slowest stage.
A lightly used resource may be shared between stages of one pipeline or
between independent pipelines. An arbiter resolves conflicts when multiple
sharers request the resource simultaneously. Variable throughput may result
from a sharing stage losing arbitration, and can be mitigated through the use
of FIFO buffers between stages.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
IBM’s 7030 (Stretch) computer was the first to be pipelined [23]. Built in the
early 1960s, the computer boasted memory modules of 128 KB and a multi-
million dollar price tag. The canonical five-stage pipeline was used in a
MIPS processor in the early 1980s [47]. Further details on CPU pipelines
can be found in refs. [48] and [93]. Network pipelines are detailed and
described in ref. [34]. For more details on one of the first pipelines – Henry
Ford’s assembly line and manufacturing process – read ref. [2].
Exercises
23.1Latency and throughput, I. Assume that a module has a latency of 20
ns and that treg = 500 ps. Including the output register, what are the
latency and throughput of this module?
23.2Latency and throughput, II. Assume that a module has a latency of 20
ns and that treg = 500 ps. Including the output register, what are the
latency and throughput of this module when it is replicated five
times?
23.3Latency and throughput, III. Assume that a module has a latency of
20 ns and that treg = 500 ps. Including the output register, what are
the latency and throughput of this module when pipelined into five
equal stages?
23.4Latency and throughput, IV. Assume that a module has a latency of
20 ns and that treg = 500 ps. Including the output register, what are
the latency and throughput of this module when pipelined into five
equal stages and then this pipeline is replicated five times?
23.5Latency, throughput, and area, I. Assume you have a module that
consumes 100 units of area and has a delay of 10 ns. The pipeline

--- Page 709 ---
registers have an area of 2 units, and treg = 500 ps. By varying the
number of pipeline stages, make a graph with throughput on the y-
axis and area on the x-axis. What can you say about the cost (area)
versus benefit (throughput) for very deep pipelines?
23.6Latency, throughput, and area, II. Repeat Exercise 23.5, but instead
set the area per pipeline register at 20 units (keeping all other
parameters the same). Compare the two plots with each other,
commenting on what you think is the “best” pipeline depth for each.
23.7Batch latency. We have shown that pipelining incurs a latency
penalty of ntreg. This problem looks at the latency of processing a
batch of jobs. Given a module that has a latency of 20 ns and treg =
500 ps, how long does it take from start to finish to do ten units of
work:
(a) with a single unpipelined instance of the module;
(b) if the module is replicated five times;
(c) if the module is divided into five pipeline stages.
(d) Repeat (a), (b), and (c) for 1000 units of work.
23.8Latency and throughput design. You have been given the task of
designing a new media chip for HD applications. Specifications call
for the rendering of a 1920 × 1080 pixel image at 60 Hz. With a
single module, it takes 10 μs to process one pixel, and treg is 500 ps.
(a) What is the throughput needed, in pixels per second, for your
processor?
(b) Your coworker suggests making one long pipeline. Can you do
this and still meet your throughput goal? If so, how many stages
does it require? If not, why not?
(c) Why could a single pipeline be a bad idea?
(d) Another coworker suggests just replicating the processing
module; how many do you need?
(e) Why would this be a bad idea?
(f) After talking to the logic designers, you decide to use replicated
ten-stage pipelines. Howmanydoyouneed?
23.9Pipelined adders. What are the latency, throughput, clock time, and
number of flip-flops used for each of the following implementations

--- Page 710 ---
of the 32-bit adder of Section 23.3? Recall that tdcc = 100 ps (delay of
a one-bit add) and that treg = 200 ps.
(a) Four stages of eight bits each.
(b) Two stages of 16 bits each.
(d) Thirty-two stages of one bit each.
23.10Data forwarding. The adder pipeline of Figure 23.7 prevents the use
of a + b until the entire add has completed (four cycles). Modify the
adder so that it can begin executing an add of a1 + (a0 + b0) on the
cycle after a0 + b0 begins. You will need to include a dataFwd signal
to indicate a forwarding condition. The throughput and latency of the
adder should stay the same, except for the minimal logic you will
need to add.
23.11 Speculation, single buffer. In Section 22.6.2 we briefly discussed
speculation, where a downstream pipeline stage can trigger all
upstream stages to drop their current problem. Add a fail signal into
the block diagram of Figure 23.9 and the VHDL of Figure 23.10.
When asserted, all upstream data should be invalidated.
23.12Speculation, double buffer. Repeat Exercise 23.11 with the double
buffer of Figure 23.11 and the VHDL of Figure 23.12. The fail signal
should propagate by only one stage per cycle (like the ready signal).
23.13Stall critical paths. In an eight-stage pipeline, assume that each logic
block has latency of 5 ns and treg = 0. Each logic block’s stall signal
becomes stable (evaluated) after 4 ns. The wire delay from the
beginning to end of a stage is 500 ps.
(a) Without double buffering, what is the maximum legal clock rate?
(b) With double buffering, what is the maximum legal clock rate?
23.14Load balancing, bottleneck detection. Suppose you have a system
where every problem must pass through four pipeline stages with
delays of 30 ns, 60 ns, 15 ns, and 20 ns. Which stage is the
bottleneck? What is the utilization (time spent doing useful work
divided by total time) of each stage?
23.15Load balancing, replication. Suppose you have a system where every
problem must pass through four pipeline stages with delays of 30 ns,
60 ns, 15 ns, and 20 ns. Each stage cannot be further pipelined, but
can be replicated. How many of each module do you need in order to

--- Page 711 ---
have full utilization of your system? (That is, no module should ever
be idle, after a warm-up period.)
23.16Load balancing, pipelining. Suppose you have a system where every
problem must pass through four pipeline stages with delays of 30 ns,
60 ns, 15 ns, and 20 ns. Each stage cannot be replicated, but can be
pipelined. What is the minimum number of stages, from beginning to
end, in a pipeline that has no load imbalance?
23.17Bottleneck replication, control. In Figure 23.14, we replicated the
bottleneck stage four times and kept the clock rate at 4 ns. This
requires the stages with 1 ns delays to produce four results every
cycle. For this exercise, design control logic for both the input and
the output of the bottleneck stage that uses a 1 ns clock. The control
should give new work to each of the 4 ns stages once every 4 ns in a
staggered fashion (cycle 1 to module 1, cycle 2 to module 2, etc.). At
the output of these replicated modules, the data from the completing
module should be fed into the pipeline register before the final stage.
23.18Resource sharing. You have four replicated pipelines in a system.
One stage in each of these pipelines accesses a shared resource 50%
of the time (at random). For each value of n, the number of shared
resources, compute the utilization of the shared resources and the
probability that more than n requests are made in one cycle:
(a) n = 2;
(b) n = 3;
(c) n = 4.
23.19Variable loads. Using the simple pipeline of Figure 23.15(a) and a
queue depth of three buffers, how long will it take to finish
computation if stage B has the following delay profiles. Assume all
three buffers are initially empty. Draw diagrams indicating the stall
conditions (if any) as in Figure 23.15(b).
(a) 15, 5, 15, 5, 15, 5, 15, 5, 15, 5;
(b) 15, 15, 15, 15, 15, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5;
(c) 15, 15, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 15, 15, 15.
1 The instruction fetch stage needs to wait until the memory stage has been completed before
proceeding.
2 As with all rules, there are exceptions, two examples of which are stall signals (Section 23.4) and
result forwarding (Exercise 23.10).

--- Page 712 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 713 ---
24
Interconnect
The interconnect between modules is as important a component of most
systems as the modules being connected. As described in Section 5.6,
wires account for a large fraction of the delay and power in a typical
system. A wire of just 3 μm in length has the same capacitance (and hence
dissipates the same power) as a minimum-sized inverter. A wire of about
100 μm in length dissipates about the same power as one bit of a fast
adder.
Whereas simple systems are connected with direct point-to-point
connections between modules, larger and more complex systems are
better organized with a bus or a network. Consider an analogy to a
telephone or intercom system. If you need to talk to only two or three
people, you might use a direct line to each person you need to talk to.
However, if you need to talk to hundreds of people, you would use a
switching system, allowing you to dial any of your correspondents over a
shared interconnect.
24.1 ABSTRACT INTERCONNECT
Figure 24.1 shows a high-level view of a system using a general interconnect
(e.g., a bus or a network). A number of clients are connected to the network
by a pair of links to and from the interconnect. The links may be serialized
(Section 22.3), and flow control is required on at least the link into the
interconnect – to back-pressure the client in the event of contention.

--- Page 714 ---
Figure 24.1. An abstract interconnect provides arbitrary connections between a number of clients.
Each link into the interconnect is flow-controlled and transfers a packet containing a destination
address.
To communicate, client S (the source client), transmits a packet over the
link iS into the interconnect. The packet includes, at minimum, a destination
address, D, andapayload, P, which may be of arbitrary (or even variable)
length. The interconnect, possibly with some delay due to contention,
delivers P to client D over link oD out of the interconnect. The payload P
may contain a request type (e.g., read or write), a local address within D, and
data or other arguments for a remote operation. Because the interconnect is
addressed, any client A can communicate with any client B while requiring
only a single pair of unidirectional links on each client module.
A packet (D, P) sent from S to D may result in D sending a reply packet
(S, Q) with payload Q back to S. However, this is not required.
Communications may be one-way.
The interconnect may or may not permit multiple concurrent operations.
For high throughput, we would like an interconnect that permits multiple
independent client pairs to communicate simultaneously. Also, if a reply
packet is required, we would like S to be able to send several packets to the
same or different destinations before having to wait for a reply. Lower-cost
interconnects, like the bus in Section 24.2, however, do not support this
degree of concurrency.
24.2 BUSES
The broadcast bus is one of the simplest general-purpose interconnects and
is widely used in applications that have modest performance requirements. A
bus has the advantages of simplicity, a broadcast facility, and serialization

--- Page 715 ---
(ordering) of all transactions. The major disadvantage of a bus is its
performance. It allows only one packet to be sent at a time.
Figure 24.2 shows a typical bus interconnect. Each module connects to the
bus via a bus interface that converts the module’s ready–valid flow control to
bus arbitration. In addition to the ready and valid signals, each module’s
connection to the interface includes address and data fields.
Figure 24.2. Bus interconnect. Modules connect to the bus via a bus interface. A source module
arbitrates for access to the bus and then drives its packet onto the bus. All destination interfaces
monitor the address field of the bus and supply the packet to their client if it has a matching address.
VHDL code for a purely combinational bus interface is shown in Figure
24.3. The figure uses a signal-naming convention where the first letter of the
name denotes the side of the interface: b for bus or c for client, and the
second letter of the name denotes the direction: r for for outbound (bus
receive), and t for inbound (bus transmit).

--- Page 716 ---
Figure 24.3. VHDL code for a combinational bus interface.
When a client wishes to communicate with another module on the bus, it
places the address of the destination module on its address field cr_addr,
puts the data to be communicated on its data field cr_data, and asserts valid
cr_valid. The bus interface routes the valid signal from the module to the
central bus arbiter (arb_req = cr_valid), which performs an arbitration and
sends a single grant back to one requesting interface (see Section 8.5). The
bus interface routes the grant signal back to the requesting module as a ready

--- Page 717 ---
signal (cr_ready = arb_grant), and also uses this signal to gate the
module’s data and address onto the bus.
If a requesting client loses arbitration, it simply waits with cr_valid
asserted until it wins arbitration as signaled on cr_ready.
The bus drive logic assumes that the bus performs an OR of the signals
driven from each bus interface; each interface drives a zero when not
selected. Off-chip, a tri-state drive is sometimes used. However, on-chip tri-
state buses are problematic for a number of reasons (see Section 4.3.4).
Thus, on-chip buses are usually implemented by ORing together the signals
from all of the bus interfaces and then distributing the result back to all bus
interfaces.
On the inbound side, each bus interface monitors the address field of the
bus for its address. When a matching address is detected, and the bus valid
signal is asserted, the bus data are routed to the destination module along
with a valid indication. Push flow control is commonly used on the receive
side of buses (i.e., the modules must immediately accept data addressed to
them). We explore adding full flow control to the bus receivers in Exercise
24.1.
The bus can be adapted to perform either multicast or broadcast
communication. To specify a multicast, the address signals are replaced by
an output-selection bit vector, where each bit corresponds to one of the
clients. To send a packet to a single client, only a single bit of the bit vector
is set. To multicast the packet to multiple clients, multiple bits are set – one
for each destination. When all bits of the bit vector are set, the packet is
broadcast to all of the clients. The transformation of the VHDL to perform
multicast is straightforward for push flow control, but requires some care in
handling the ready signals for full two-way flow control on the output side.
This is explored in Exercise 24.4.
The logic in Figure 24.3 is strictly combinational. This assumes that all
clients share a common clock. At the end of each clock cycle, a client with
cr_valid = cr_ready = 1 has completed an outgoing transaction and can
move on to its next transaction or deassert cr_valid. Similarly, a client with
ct_valid at the end of the clock cycle must accept the incoming transaction.
The clock cycle must be long enough to allow both the bus arbitration and
the propagation of the signals over the bus to take place in a single clock
cycle. In Exercise 24.2 we explore how these two functions can be pipelined
to improve bus speed.

--- Page 718 ---
The logic in Figure 24.3 is also completely parallel – transferring the
address and all of the data in a single cycle. On-chip, where wires are
plentiful, a fully parallel bus is often the correct solution. Off-chip, however,
or on-chip in cases where the data are already serialized, a serialized bus that
performs transactions over several cycles as shown in Figure 22.6 is
preferred, in order to reduce pin count or avoid deserialization. We explore
this approach in Exercise 24.3.
We have described both our abstract interconnect (Section 24.1) and our
bus as performing one-way communication – delivering a packet from a
sender to a receiver. If a reply is required, for example when reading a
memory location located in the receiver, a separate packet is sent over the
interconnect in the reverse direction. Performing an operation with two
separate communications, one for request and one for reply, is sometimes
called a split transaction. This is to contrast the operation to some historic
buses that included a reply with the ready signal completing the request –
eliminating the need for a separate reply communication.
In general, sending a reply as a separate communication is preferred for
speed and generality. First, a combined request–reply transaction is very
slow and holds the bus idle while the receiver is performing the action
needed to compose the reply. In the case of a memory read, for example, it
may take 100 ns (100 1 GHz clock cycles) actually to read the memory.
Holding the bus idle for these cycles wastes a valuable communication
resource. Second, performing a combined transaction over a multi-stage
interconnect like a network is difficult (Section 24.4). Thus, a client that
expects this type of interconnect is limited in what it can connect to.
24.3 CROSSBAR SWITCHES
When an interconnect with more performance than a bus can deliver is
needed and the number of clients is small (typically fewer than 16), a
crossbar (sometimes called crosspoint) switch is often a good solution.
Figure 24.4 illustrates a crossbar switch that connects m sending clients to n
receiving clients. In the most common case, m = n, and every client is both a
sender and a receiver. Each of the lines in the figure includes data and valid
signals in the forward direction and a ready signal in the reverse direction.

--- Page 719 ---
The sending clients also provide an address to select the receiving client(s)
to which their data should be delivered.
Figure 24.4. A crossbar switch can connect any idle input to any idle output, supporting many
simultaneous connections.
When a sending client i wants to communicate with a receiving client j, it
puts j on its address signal, puts the data to communicate on its data signal,
and asserts valid. The allocator considers all connection requests and
generates a set of non-conflicting grants (an m× n matrix of binary signals
that enable the crosspoints). If client i’s request to send a packet to j is
granted, the allocator asserts gij, enabling the crosspoint at row i and column
j. This connects the data and valid signals from row i to column j and
connects the ready signal from column j to row i.
The allocator considers an m×n matrix of connection requests and
generates an m×n matrix of non-conflicting grants. To be non-conflicting,
each row and column in the grant matrix can have at most a single 1. In the
case where each input specifies only a single output (on its address signal),
there is at most a single 1 in each row of the request matrix, and the
allocation reduces to n arbitrations, one for each column.
In the more general case, each sending client may buffer several packets
and request multiple destinations (one for each buffered packet). In this case
there may be multiple 1s per row of the request matrix, and the allocator

--- Page 720 ---
must solve a bipartite matching problem. Such general allocators are
described in detail in ref. [34].
VHDL code for a 2 × 2 crossbar switch with full ready–valid flow control
at both inputs and outputs is shown in Figure 24.5. The arbitration in this
example always gives priority to client 0. This code, which generates the
grant matrix from the request matrix, can be replaced with a fairer arbiter if
required. The grants, once generated, are used to enable both the forward
connections (for valid and data) and the reverse connection (for ready).
Once the addressing and arbitration have been performed, the crossbar
connects the ready, valid, and data lines of the flow-controlled interface
between a source client and a destination client.

--- Page 722 ---
Figure 24.5. VHDL code for a 2 × 2 crossbar switch with full flow control.
Like the bus, the crossbar can be pipelined with arbitration performed one
cycle ahead of data communication. If needed, the horizontal part of switch
communication can be done in parallel with the arbitration – with a pipeline
register at each crosspoint. The vertical part of communication is then done
on the following cycle. This organization is considered in Exercise 24.10.
Also like the bus, the crossbar can perform multicast and handle serialized
interfaces. We explore these variations in Exercises 24.8 and 24.9.
The throughput of a crossbar can be increased by providing buffering for
entire packets at the crosspoints. This decouples input and output scheduling.
An input can stack up packets destined for multiple outputs at different
crosspoints in its row. These packets then arbitrate with other packets in their
column for access to their output.
24.4 INTERCONNECTION NETWORKS
When more than 16 clients must be connected, an interconnection network is
usually required in order to provide communication between the modules.
An interconnection network consists of asetofrouters connected by channels
and is characterized by a topology, arouting algorithm, and a flow-control
method.
The network topology specifies a set of routers and channels and how they
are connected. For example, Figure 24.6 shows an interconnection network
that connects 18 clients using a 3 × 3 two-dimensional mesh topology with
two clients per router. The network has nine routers, with up to six bi-
directional ports each, and 12 bi-directional channels. Each router is
connected to its neighbors in the 3 × 3 mesh.

--- Page 723 ---
Figure 24.6. An interconnection network connects clients via a network of channels connected by
routers.
The routing algorithm specifies a path through the network from a source
client to a destination client. One possible routing algorithm for this network
is dimension-order routing, in which a packet is routed first in the x-
dimension to the destination column, then in the y-dimension to the
destination row, and finally to the destination client port.
For example, consider routing from client 0 to client 11. Client 0 injects
the packet (over the same interface as introduced in Section 24.1) into router
00, and the packet is routed first in the x-dimension to router 20. This route
takes place over x-channels, cx00 and cx10, and intervening router 10. Next
the packet is routed in the y-dimension to router 21 via y-channel cy20.
Finally, the packet is delivered to the client 11 port on router 21.
Interconnection-network flow control, as opposed to interface flow
control, deals with the allocation of resources to packets as they traverse the

--- Page 724 ---
network. The resources in a typical network are channels and buffers. Each
resource is allocated to a particular packet for an interval of time – after
which it is free to be allocated to a different packet.
As an example of flow control, Figure 24.7 shows the allocation of
resources to a packet as it travels from client 0 to client 11 along the
dimension-order route. Time is on the horizontal axis and resources are listed
on the vertical axis. In the absence of contention, the packet advances one
step of the route each clock cycle. It traverses the output port of client 0 in
cycle 0, the internals of router 00 in cycle 1, and channel cx00e (the
eastbound half of channel cx00) in cycle 2. At router 10, cx10e is not
immediately available, and the packet is buffered for two additional cycles at
this point. A similar delay is encountered at router 20 for one cycle. Finally,
in cycle 11, the packet is delivered to client 11.
Figure 24.7. Time–space diagram illustrating the flow of one packet from client 0 to client 11. The
packet is blocked for two cycles at router 10 and one cycle at router 20.
The flow-control protocol here allocates buffers in the routers and
bandwidth on the channels. The availability of buffering in the network
decouples the timing of resource allocation. With buffering, a packet arriving
at router 10 on cx00e in cycle 2 can depart on cx10e in cycle 6 – because it is
held in the buffer during cycles 4 and 5. Without buffering, the packet would
need to depart on cycle 4 or be dropped.
The relationship of topology, routing, and flow control in an
interconnection network can be understood as an analogy to driving over the

--- Page 725 ---
highways. The topology is the road map, the channels are the road segments,
and the routers are the intersections. The routing algorithm is how you
choose your route; given your current position and destination, you choose a
path over roads and through intersections to get to your destination. The
flow control is governed by the traffic lights that allocate the next segment
of road to you. The road leading into the intersection acts as a buffer –
holding your car until you are allocated the next channel by the traffic light.
So far, we have assumed the entire packet is delivered in parallel in a
single clock cycle. As with the other interconnects we have discussed, an
interconnection network can be serialized – with a packet being delivered
over several cycles over a narrower interface. With a serialized network, the
flow control can be performed either at the level of a whole packet (in which
case routers must have buffers large enough to hold whole packets) or at the
level of flow-control digits, or flits (usually the amount of information
delivered in one clock cycle). Packet-level flow control is similar to the
frame-level flow control shown in Figure 22.6, while flit-level flow control
is similar to a normal ready–valid interface.
A full treatment of interconnection networks is beyond the scope of this
book. If they are not properly designed, these networks are subject to
deadlocks from routing or higher-level protocol interactions. One way to
eliminate deadlock, and more generally to isolate traffic, is to allocate
buffers in a way that makes a single physical channel in the network appear
to be multiple virtual channels. These concepts, and many other topics, are
discussed in detail in ref. [34].
Summary
The interconnect between modules is a critical component in most digital
systems. When connecting more than a few modules, a switched
interconnect, such as a bus or a network, is preferable to providing dedicated
point-to-point links between communicating modules. Much like a telephone
exchange, a switched interconnect allows each client module to
communicate with any other module using only a single pair of links – one
in each direction.
A bus is the simplest implementation of a switched interconnect. In a bus
system, clients arbitrate for access to a single shared communication
channel. The winning client drives its data, along with a destination address,

--- Page 726 ---
onto the channel. The receiving module, upon recognizing its address, reads
the data from the bus. Buses have advantages of simplicity, providing
ordering of all communications, and providing a broadcast facility. However,
they have limited performance – because only one client can transmit at a
time.
A crossbar switch can be used to connect a small number of clients when
more performance is needed than a bus can provide. A crossbar allows
multiple communication actions to be performed simultaneously as long as
conflicts are avoided.
To connect larger numbers of clients, an interconnection network is
typically used. An interconnection network consists of a number of routers
connected by channels. The connection of routers and channels is called the
topology of the network. A routing algorithm selects a path, through routers
and over channels, to forward a packet from source to destination. Resources
along this path are allocated using a flow-control method.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
For further information about interconnection networks as a whole, consult
refs. [32] and [34] by Dally. Reference [66] provides an overview of a bus
that was in a recent commercial processor, IBM’s Cell.
Exercises
24.1Bus receiver with flow control. The simple combinational bus of
Figure 24.3 provides full ready–valid flow control on the outgoing
side (signals cr_xxx), but only one-way push flow control on the
incoming side (signals ct_xxx). Modify this interface to provide full
ready–valid flow control on the incoming side. (Hint: this will
require adding signal ct_ready to the client side of the interface and
signals bt_ready and br_ready to the bus side.)
24.2Pipelined bus arbitration. The simple combinational bus of Figure
24.3 can be made faster by pipelining the arbitration one cycle ahead
of the bus transfer. Sketch a block diagram and write (and test) the
VHDL code for a bus interface that pipelines arbitration in this
manner. The interface signals should be identical to those in Figure
24.3. Also, your module should be able to perform back-to-back

--- Page 727 ---
transactions from a single bus interface. (Hint: to perform back-to-
back transfers, the module must buffer one transaction (address and
data) internally while accepting the next transaction for arbitration.)
24.3Serialized bus. Modify the bus interface of Figure 24.3 to perform
serialized transfers as illustrated in Figure 22.6. Assume that the bus
itself has a single four-bit wide path to carry both address and data.
Assume the address is four bits wide and the data is 20 bits wide
(four bits of control and 16 bits of payload data). Send the address
first. Assume frame-level, two-way flow control at the source and
one-way push flow control at the destination.
24.4Multicast bus with full flow control. Modify the VHDL of Figure
24.3 to handle multicast with full flow control on the receiver (as in
Exercise 24.1). Assume that cr_addr is replaced with cr_vector, a
bit vector that can specify multiple destination clients. (Hint:
bt_valid must not be asserted until all selected outputs assert
ct_ready.)
24.5Daisy-chain bus arbitration. Design (and code) a controller and
arbiter for a combinational daisy-chained bus. A daisy-chained bus
does not have a centralized arbiter, but rather each controller makes a
local request/grant decision. Controller 0 will always receive a grant
and place its data onto the bus if it has a request. Controller 1 grants
itself access to the bus only if controller 0 has not made a request,
and so forth. Controller N will get the bus only if all N − 1
downstream controllers have no requests.
24.6Distributed bus arbitration. Write a controller to carry out distributed
bus arbitration. During each round of arbitration (over multiple clock
cycles), each controller with a request puts its priority onto a bus that
ORs together all signals. On the first round, if the MSB of the bus
priority is greater than that of a given controller, that controller drops
out of participation. This process is then repeated using the MSB −1
bit and all remaining requesters. At the end of arbitration, only one
controller will remain and become the bus master.
24.74 × 4 crossbar. Write the VHDL to implement a 4 × 4 crossbar switch
with full flow control. Use the same input and output signals as in
Figure 24.5, but with two more controllers.
24.8Multicast crossbar. Design a 4 × 4 crossbar that supports multicast
messaging. Each input can request one or more outputs, but

--- Page 728 ---
arbitration must be done as all or nothing. That is, an input is either
granted to send to all outputs or can send to none at all.
24.9Serialized crossbar. Modify the 2 × 2 crossbar of Figure 24.5 to
allow the serialized transport of a 20-bit payload. The crossbar wires
should be only four bits wide and should perform arbitration and
flow control on the head only once for each packet.
24.10Buffered crosspoints. Design a crossbar to have n2 buffered
crosspoints. On each cycle, every input will write into the buffer that
connects that input to the desired output (provided the buffer is not
full). The output channels then arbitrate between the input crosspoints
with requests, popping one of them and outputting the data.
24.11 VHDL implementation of a simple router. Write the VHDL code for a
simple router for use in a mesh network such as that illustrated in
Figure 24.6. Your router should have a single client port with ready–
valid flow control in both directions and ports for channels in four
directions (west, east, north, and south) also with ready–valid flow
control. Each of the five inputs to your router should provide double
buffering (Section 23.5) so that if the next channel is not immediately
available the packet can be buffered without requiring a
combinational path to the previous router. Assume that the entire
route is encoded in the address field of the packet, with three bits per
hop specifying the port for that hop. Each router should use the most
significant three bits and then shift the address field three bits left to
put the next router’s routing information in this position.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 729 ---
25
Memory systems
Memory is widely used in digital systems for many different purposes. In
a processor, SDDR DRAM chips are used for main memory and SRAM
arrays are used to implement caches, translation lookaside buffers, branch
prediction tables, and other internal storage. In an Internet router (Figure
23.3(b)), memory is used for packet buffers, for routing tables, to hold
per-flow data, and to collect statistics. In a cellphone SoC, memory is
used to buffer video and audio streams.
A memory is characterized by three key parameters: its capacity, its
latency, and its throughput. Capacity is the amount of data stored, latency
is the amount of time taken to access data, and throughput is the number
of accesses that can be done in a fixed amount of time.
A memory in a system, e.g., the packet buffer in a router, is often
composed of multiple memory primitives: on-chip SRAM arrays or
external DRAM chips.1 The number of primitives needed to realize a
memory is governed by its capacity and its throughput. If one primitive
does not have sufficient capacity to realize the memory, multiple
primitives must be used – with just one primitive accessed at a time.
Similarly, if one primitive does not have sufficient bandwidth to provide
the required throughput, multiple primitives must be used in parallel – via
duplication or interleaving.
25.1 MEMORY PRIMITIVES
The vast majority of all memories in digital systems are implemented from
two basic primitives: on-chip SRAM arrays and external SDDR DRAM

--- Page 730 ---
chips.2 Here we will consider these memory primitives as black boxes,
discussing their properties and how to interface to them. It is beyond the
scope of this book to look inside the box and study their implementation.
25.1.1SRAM arrays
On-chip SRAM arrays are useful for building small, fast, dedicated
memories integrated near the logic that produces and consumes the data they
store. While the total capacity of the SRAM that can be realized on one chip
(about 400 Mb) is small compared with a single 4 Gb DRAM chip, these
arrays can be accessed in a single clock cycle, compared with 25 cycles or
more for a DRAM access. By operating many SRAM arrays in parallel, very
high aggregate memory bandwidths can be achieved. Consider, for example,
a chip with 1024 1K × 64 SRAMs (64Mb total) that operate at 1 GHz. The
aggregate bandwidth is 8 TB/s. In contrast, a typical DRAM chip has a
bandwidth of 1 GB/s or less. The location of the SRAM – on-chip, right next
to the logic that uses it – is also a critical advantage. The advantage of
single-cycle access is diminished if the SRAM is 20 cycles away on the
other side of the chip, or, worse, on another chip.
As described in Section 8.9, an SRAM accepts an address, a data input,
and a write signal, and produces a data output. An SRAM can have any
number of ports P, but the vast majority of SRAMs are single-ported
(because cost increases as P2). Dual-ported SRAMs, with one read and one
write port, are not uncommon. SRAMs with more than two ports are unusual
– and costly.
Most SRAMs are synchronous – operating off of a clock – as shown in
Figure 25.1. Each port can perform one read or one write (but not both) each
cycle. The address and write data must be set up ts before the rising edge of
the clock and held until th after the clock edge. Read data are available a
propagation delay (tdad) after the rising edge of the clock. The clock cycle
must be large enough to allow time for the write operation, internal
precharge, and other internal operations to complete. For most SRAMs,
reading and writing the same address in a single cycle, as illustrated in cycle
3 of the figure, results in undefined read data.

--- Page 731 ---
Figure 25.1. Timing of a dual-ported synchronous SRAM. When the read (write) (r and w,
respectively) signal is high on a clock edge, the data at address ra (wa) is read (written). The read and
write signals, addresses, and data have setup- and hold-time constraints. The time between the clock
and data output on a read is tdad.
SRAMs are organized as arrays of cells with row decoders and column
multiplexers, like the ROM of Figure 8.46, but with an SRAM cell at the
junction of each word line and each bit line. Electrical constraints limit the
maximum size of the basic array to no more than 256 rows and no more than
256 columns (64 Kb or 8 KB). Depending on the multiplexing factor, a
single maximum-size 256 × 256 SRAM array can realize a 64K × 1-bit
RAM, a 256 × 256-bit RAM,3 and many sizes between these two extremes,
such as a 2K × 32-bit RAM. A single SRAM array – including decoder and
multiplexer – typically operates in one clock cycle.
If we need a RAM larger than 8 KB or wider than 256 bits, we must
combine multiple RAM arrays via bit-slicing or banking (Section 25.2).
25.1.2DRAM chips
DRAM is the fast4 off-chip memory technology with the lowest cost per bit.
Contemporary DRAM chips have a capacity of up to 4 Gb, significantly
more storage than can be realized on a single chip using SRAM primitives.
This large capacity, however, leads to a high latency. A modern SDDR3
memory chip has a latency of 20 ns compared with an on-chip SRAM array
that may have a latency of 400 ps.
Dynamic memory is not inherently any slower than static memory.
However, a commodity DRAM chip is much slower than an on-chip SRAM

--- Page 732 ---
array for three reasons. First, because the DRAM chip is a discrete part, a
large fraction of the latency is spent traversing the chip interface. Second,
because the part has a large capacity, considerable time is required to
traverse on-chip buses to access a particular sub-array within the chip.
Finally, because they are part of a system with high communication latency,
the sub-arrays within a DRAM chip are not optimized for speed.
While some applications use single DRAM chips, DRAM is more
commonly used in modules that build a memory from several DRAM chips
in a bit-sliced manner (Section 25.2). Multiple modules may be interleaved
(Section 25.3) to provide a higher-bandwidth memory. The memory of high-
performance CPUs, for example, is organized in this manner. For the
remainder of this section, we focus on a single DRAM chip.
Reading (or writing) a DRAM module requires a three-step sequence of
row activation, column access, and precharge, as illustrated in Figures 25.2
and 25.3. The interface of a DRAM module consists of address, data, and
control buses. Because DRAM pins are limited, both address and data buses
are serialized. Addresses are split into bank, row, and column bit fields. To
read a specific address from DRAM, the first step is to activate a row of a
particular bank on the basis of the bank (upper) and row (middle) bits of the
memory address. As illustrated in Figure 25.3(a), row activation reads a row
of the selected bank into the bank’s sense amplifiers. The process of reading
the data destroys the stored data, so at the end of the row activation the
memory is left in an unknown state, illustrated in Figure 25.3(b). Before the
column address and command are issued, the controller must wait a fixed
latency, tRCD,5 for the row activation to complete. Operations can be
performed on other banks during this delay.
Figure 25.2. Timing of a DRAM chip. A command to activate bank 0, row 0 is issued in cycle 2. A
second activation command, this time to bank 3, row 6, is sent at cycle 3. After a delay of tRCD, a
command to read bank 0, active row, column 0 is issued in cycle 4. After tCL, data are output starting

--- Page 733 ---
in cycle 7. A row must be precharged (as in cycle 8) before a different row in the same bank can be
accessed. If another column in the same row is accessed, as at cycle 10, no precharge is necessary.
After the row activation is complete, a read (or write) command is issued
along with the bank and column addresses. After tCL (CAS latency or
column latency), the first sub-word of data appears on the data pins. A new
sub-word appears every cycle thereafter in a burst, until the read has
completed.6 Multiple read and write operations can be performed on an
activated row without the need for another activation cycle.
After all read and write operations have been completed on a row, a
precharge operation is performed to write the data in the sense amps back
into the memory array (Figure 25.3(c)). From the time the precharge
command is issued (cycle 8 in Figure 25.2) the controller must wait tpc to
allow the precharge operation to complete before performing another row
activation on the same bank. Other banks can be accessed during this delay.

--- Page 734 ---
Figure 25.3. Steps taken to read a DRAM memory bank. (a) A specific row is first activated and read
into the sense amplifiers, destroying the stored data. (b) Next, commands are used to read and write
specific columns of the activated row. Finally, in (c), the precharge command writes the row back into
the array. Multiple reads can be issued to different columns in the same row without a
precharge/activate sequence. Also, rows can be activated in multiple banks at the same time.
Unlike SRAM, the latency between processing two subsequent requests in
a DRAM is not address-independent. An access to a row that is already
activated takes only tCL, whereas accessing a new row in a bank that has
already been precharged requires tRCD + tCL,and accessing a row in a bank
that must first be precharged before the row can be activated takes tRCD + tCL
+ tpc. Optimized memory controllers consider a pool of requests and issue
them out of order to handle all requests for an active row before switching
rows [97].

--- Page 735 ---
The amount of data returned on each memory access is called the memory
atom. Ideally, every bit of the atom returned by each request is needed.
While an SRAM array can be configured to have an atom that is exactly the
required size, DRAMs typically have a minimum atom size. This minimum
size is typically multiple words in length. If the minimum atom is larger than
needed, energy and bandwidth are wasted.
DRAM interfaces are standardized to facilitate interoperation of DRAMs
from many vendors in many different types of system. The JEDEC standards
body sets specifications for a given type of DRAM, e.g., DDR3 or GDDR5,
and multiple vendors build parts that meet the specification. These standards
include definitions of pins, signaling methodology, and commands.
Within one standard, DRAM performance is specified by a clock rate and
latencies for each operation. For example, timing of an SDDR3 DRAM part
is specified by fclk, tCL, tRCD, tRP, and tRAS (the minimum time between an
activate and precharge command). A DDR3-1600 8-8-8-24 has an 800 MHz
I/O clock7 and eight cycle timings for everything but tRAS (24 cycles).
Reading a column from an open row, for example, takes eight 1.25 ns cycles,
or 10 ns.
25.2 BIT-SLICING AND BANKING MEMORY
When we need a memory larger or wider than we can build from a single
primitive (SRAM or DRAM), we combine several primitives using either
bit-slicing or banking. With bit-slicing, we divide the primitives across the
bits of our memory subsystem. With banking, the primitives are divided
across the address space of our memory subsystem. The two can be
combined with primitives divided across both bits and address space.
For example, suppose we need to build a 1Mb (128 KB) SRAM array
organized as 16K × 64. Figure 25.4 shows two ways to realize such a
memory from 16 64 Kb memory arrays: bit-slicing (Figure 25.4(a)) and
banking (Figure 25.4(b)). With bit-slicing, the address is distributed in
parallel to 16 16K × 4 arrays and each array provides four bits of the output.
With banking, one of 16 1K × 64 banks is selected by decoding the upper
bits of the address. The low bits of the address are broadcast to all banks to

--- Page 736 ---
select a word in each bank. The decoded high bits select between bank
outputs.
Figure 25.4. Two different multiple-primitive configurations for increasing memory capacity. Bit-
slicing (a) reads a sub-word from each primitive simultaneously and combines them to form the
output. Banking (b) reads the entire output word from a single primitive selected by the high bits of
the address. With banking, the other primitives may remain inactive saving power.

--- Page 737 ---
The two configurations have the same capacity (1 Mb) and bandwidth (8
B per cycle). Also, in practice, both the bit-sliced and the banked memories
would be laid out as a two-dimensional 4 × 4 array of memory primitives.
In a bit-sliced memory, all memory arrays must be accessed to complete
an operation, since each provides a portion of the result. In a banked
memory, however, only one array needs to be accessed. If the decoder output
is used to activate only the selected array, the other arrays can remain idle,
saving energy compared with a bit-sliced access.
Combining bit-slicing and banking gives a memory architecture like that
shown in Figure 25.5. Each of the 16 primitives is 4K × 16 – requiring four
arrays (one row) to read (or write) a full 64 bits. Four rows – addressed as
banks – are needed to give the required memory capacity of 1 Mb. Every
read or write request activates the four memory primitives in one row. The
other 12 primitives remain idle.

--- Page 738 ---
Figure 25.5. Tiling memory arrays into banks of bit-sliced arrays. All arrays in a given bank are read
(written) to satisfy a single request. Only one request is active in the system at once.
While the configurations shown here use the high address bits to select the
bank in a banked configuration, this is not a requirement. Any set of address
bits can be used to select the bank. They need not even be contiguous.
However, most memory systems use the high bits of the address for this
purpose.
25.3 INTERLEAVED MEMORY

--- Page 739 ---
Allowing multiple requests to access multiple banks simultaneously
increases our aggregate memory bandwidth. Performing simultaneous
accesses requires replacing the global address distribution of Figures 25.4
and 25.5 with an arbitrated crossbar (Section 24.3). We show this
configuration in Figure 25.6. Multiple memory accesses arbitrate for each
bank on the basis of their memory address. This enables multiple requests to
be satisfied every cycle. Of course, these banks can be further bit-sliced and
subdivided.
Figure 25.6. Interleaved memory, where M requesters arbitrate for N memory banks. A matrix of
requests, r,is passed to an arbiter that then grants (gnt) requesters access to banks through a crossbar.
The potential bandwidth of the memory system has now increased from
one word per cycle to min(N, M) words per cycle, where M is the number of
requesters and N is the number of interleaved banks. This peak aggregate
bandwidth is not always achieved, however. If two requests require access to
the same bank, a conflict occurs and one request is postponed. One or more
banks may go idle if there are no requests to their portion of the address
space on a given cycle.
When the number of banks is a power of 2, bank selection is carried out
by a subset of the address bits. The middle bits are typically used for this
purpose, as shown in Table 25.1. The low b bits of the address are used to
select a byte within a block – the amount of memory mapped to one bank
before moving on to the next bank. The next n = log2(N) bits of memory are
used to select the bank. The remaining bits are used to select the block
within the bank. This addressing maps successive addresses to different
banks, reducing the number of bank conflicts when requests are clustered
near one another.8

--- Page 740 ---
Table 25.1. Bit fields of an address in an interleaved memory system
Name Bits Description
Byte b − 1:0 Byte within B = 2b byte block
Bank n + b − 1:b One of the N = 2n banks
Block a + n + b − 1:n + b One of A = 2a blocks in each bank
With interleaved memories, each request can be satisfied by a specific
memory bank. If the switch allocator has access only to the head of each
queue, the memory system may be under-utilized because of head-of-line
blocking, Table 25.2. Even though there are requests for idle banks, these
requests are blocked behind other requests in their respective queue.
Allowing the switch allocator to consider all requests in the queue – possibly
handling requests out of order – Table 25.3, gives greater memory
utilization. In the example, full utilization is achieved.
Table 25.2. With head-of-line blocking, the memory system does not have full throughput;
requests that can be granted are stuck behind requests waiting for an over-subscribed resource
Time Q0 Q1 Q2 Q3 G0 G1 G2 G3
1 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2,
3
Q0 – – –
2 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2,
3
Q1 Q0 – –
3 2, 3 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2,
3
Q2 Q1 Q0 –
4 3 2, 3 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2,
3
Q3 Q2 Q1 Q0
5 – 3 2, 3 1, 2, 3 – Q3 Q2 Q1
6 – – 3 2,3 – – Q3 Q2
7 – – – 3 – – – Q3
Table 25.3. When the arbiter is able to see requests beyond the head of the queue, the memory
system has no head-of-line blocking; it achieves full throughput
Time Q0 Q1 Q2 Q3 G0 G1 G2 G3
1 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2, 3 0, 1, 2,
3
Q0 Q1 Q2 Q3

--- Page 741 ---
2 1, 2, 3 0, 2, 3 0, 1, 3 0, 1, 2 Q3 Q0 Q1 Q2
3 2, 3 0, 3 0, 1 1, 2 Q2 Q3 Q0 Q1
4 3 0 1 2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q0
Even with an allocator that avoids head-of-line blocking, memory
utilization is limited by load balance across the banks. To maximize memory
throughput, requests must be evenly distributed across the memory banks.
Using the middle bits of an address for bank selection typically provides
more even distribution than using the upper bits. However, pathological
cases exist where accesses are strided such that their middle bits do not
change.
If a memory is interleaved with a block size of B bytes and N different
banks, two memory addresses a0 and a1 will access the same bank if
Δa = (a0 − a1), mod(NB) = 0. (25.1)
For example, consider a 256 × 256 array of double-precision floating-
point numbers (eight bytes each). If we walk down a column of the array, Δa
= 2048. These accesses will all be the same bank of any interleaved memory
system when NB is a power of 2 less than 4096.
The simplest way to avoid these bank conflicts is to pad the array layout
to give row sizes that are relatively prime with the number of banks. For
example, if we store our 256×256 array as if it were a 257 × 256 array, Δa
becomes 2056, and the references will be evenly distributed across the
banks.
Hardware solutions that involve using a prime number of memory banks
have been proposed in order to avoid bank conflicts. However, these
solutions are costly and still result in conflicts when the stride Δa is a
multiple of the number of banks. The software solution of padding array
sizes – or more generally avoiding the bad strides – is preferred.
In real memory systems, not all requests have the same priority. Data load
requests, for example, may have a higher priority than data stores. In these
situations, we can queue each class of request in a different buffer. Higher-
priority requests are then able to bypass lower-priority items. This scheme
may starve low-priority items in the presence of constant high-priority
requests by never granting low-priority requests resource access.

--- Page 742 ---
Performance guarantees can be made by either increasing priority with wait
time or allocating a static amount of resources to each packet class. For
example, after four grants to high-priority requests, a lower-priority request
must win arbitration.
When arbitrating for DRAM, this problem becomes even more difficult,
since the time to access DRAM is address-dependent, and the controller
must decide when to open a new row. Modern memory controllers must
balance the goal of maximizing throughput while still providing a minimum
quality of service to all requests.
25.4 CACHES
When implementing a memory system, one is faced with a tradeoff between
capacity and speed. A DRAM provides gigabytes of storage, but can take
over 100 cycles to access. Small SRAM arrays can be accessed in a cycle,
but are limited to just 16–64 KB. Combining these memory components into
a memory hierarchy gives the best of both worlds. Small, fast arrays store
small amounts of frequently accessed data, and a large, slow memory stores
everything else. If the designer or programmer knows which data fall into
each category, an explicitly managed hierarchy can be used, as shown in
Figure 25.7(a). A subset of the address space is assigned to each component.
A request is handled by one of the three arrays, depending on its address.


--- Page 743 ---
Figure 25.7. Memory hierarchies composed of memories of increasing capacity and latency. (a)
Explicitly managed hierarchy, where each address maps to a specific memory. (b) Implicitly managed
cache hierarchy, where the two smaller memories hold the most recently used (MRU) words.
The situation is different, however, when the specific data patterns are not
known. A graphics card rendering a game accesses many textures,9 only a
small subset of which are in a given scene. The texture needed is not known
ahead of time, but if it is used once it will probably be used again in the next
pixel, next object, or next frame. If a player is wandering a sunny meadow,
for example, only the grass texture needs to be frequently accessed. The
sand, brick, snow, and moon textures can be stored in DRAM with no
performance loss.
This is the principle of temporal locality – that data that have been
referenced recently are likely to be referenced again in the near future. The
grass texture is used by many nearby pixels, over several objects and several
consecutive frames, before it is no longer needed. When the sand texture is
finally loaded, it too will be used repeatedly.
Access patterns also exhibit spatial locality: data that are near (in address)
the data that have just been referenced are likely to be referenced in the near
future. If we reference one pixel of our grass texture, it is very likely that we
will reference the adjacent pixels. We explore the use of line size to exploit
spatial locality in Exercise 25.6.
We can exploit temporal locality by keeping the data that have been
referenced most recently in a small, fast memory called a cache. For each
data element stored in a cache, we also store a tag, which includes the
address of the data element along with some state information. During a read
operation, each cache level is checked in sequence for the requested address
to see whether it has a copy of the requested data. If the L1 cache has a tag
containing the requested address (a cache hit), it provides the associated data
with minimum latency. If the L1 cache does not have a tag matching the
requested address (a cache miss), the search continues with the L2 cache. If
the data element is not found in any cache, it is supplied by the backing
DRAM. After the data element has been returned from a cache miss, it,
along with its address, is stored in the L1 cache – because it is now the most
recently accessed data element. When new data are brought into the cache,
some older (less recently accessed) data may need to be evicted to make
room.

--- Page 744 ---
For typical access patterns, keeping the most recently accessed data in a
cache results in very high hit rates. A typical microprocessor with a 32 KB
L1 cache has a 98% L1 hit rate on a popular set of benchmarks. This high hit
rate means that the processor almost always (98% of the time) gets the low
latency and high bandwidth of the small L1 memory while enjoying the
large capacity of the DRAM. With good locality, a cache hierarchy gives the
behavior of a large, fast memory.
A cache consists of a tag memory, which holds addresses, and a data
memory which holds lines10 (multiple adjacent words) of data associated
with each tag. In a fully associative cache, a content-addressable memory
(CAM) is used to hold the tags, as shown in Figure 25.8. The input to the
CAM is the address to be accessed. The output of the CAM is a one-hot
signal indicating the location of a match. This one-hot array of match signals
is used to enable the corresponding data line onto the output of the data
memory. If no matching address is found in the tag CAM, a miss occurs and
the request is propagated to the next level of the memory hierarchy. While
simple, this fully associative structure is used only for very small caches
(fewer than 64 entries) because CAM arrays are large and slow.
Figure 25.8. A fully associative cache includes a tag CAM and a data RAM. On a read access, the
high address bits are compared against every valid address in the tag CAM. If there is a match (a hit),
the associated word line goes high, enabling the corresponding data in the data RAM onto the output.
The low address bits select the requested word within the cache line.
Table 25.4 shows a series of accesses to a fully associative cache. On a
miss, the requested data are stored into the cache when the value returns. If
the cache is full, one line must be evicted from the cache. There are many

--- Page 745 ---
possible ways to select the line to be evicted. One option its to evict the least
recently accessed line.
Table 25.4. Example of a cache with four entries with full associativity. We show the tag stored in
each set at the time of the request and whether the request hit or missed.
Request Tag address H/M S0 S1 S2 S3
1 3ff16 M – – – –
2 40016 M 3ff16 – – –
3 40416 M 3ff16 40016 – –
4 40016 H 3ff16 40016 40416 –
5 30016 M 3ff16 40016 40416 –
6 20016 M 3ff16 40016 40416 30016
7 30016 H 20016 40016 40416 30016
A direct-mapped cache may be used to realize a cache memory that is too
large to be built using a CAM array. As shown in Figure 25.9, the tags are
stored in a conventional RAM (rather than a CAM). Both the tag and data
arrays are accessed using the middle bits of a memory address. After reading
the tag array, the upper bits of the requested address are compared with the
tag. If the upper bits of the address match the tag (a hit), the data read from
the data RAM are output.
Figure 25.9. A direct-mapped cache stores tags in a RAM array. The lowest address bits are used to
select the output word in a cache line. The middle address bits are used to read both the tag and data
arrays. The upper address bits are compared with the output of the tag array. If the upper address bits
match the tag read, a hit occurs and the data read from the data array are output.

--- Page 746 ---
Table 25.5 shows an example access pattern and tag state in a simple four-
entry cache. Since each address is directly mapped onto a single location,
evictions may occur before the cache is full. If a second address comes along
needing the same location, the first address is evicted – even if it was used
quite recently. Exercise 25.7 asks you to explore set-associative caches
where each line can be in any of w locations.
Table 25.5. Example of a cache with four sets, addressed with bits[7:6]. We show the tag stored in
each set at the time of the request and whether the request hit or missed.
Request Address Set H/M S0 S1 S2 S3
1 3ff816 3 M – – – –
2 400016 0 M – – – 3f16
3 408016 2 M 4016 – – 4f16
4 401016 0 H 4016 – 4016 4f16
5 400016 0 H 4016 – 4016 4f16
6 300016 0 M 4016 – 4016 4f16
7 400016 0 M 3016 – 4016 4f16
8 300016 0 M 4016 – 4016 4f16
The amount of data associated with each tag in a cache, a cache line, is
typically larger than a single word. Data transfers between caches and upper
levels of the memory hierarchy are performed in units of cache lines. Most
caches have line sizes between 32 and 128 bytes. The choice of line size is a
compromise between exploiting spatial locality and avoiding the transfer of
unneeded data. This tradeoff is explored in Exercise 25.6.
Memory accesses often contain more information than simply an address,
operation, and data. This meta-data, such as data destination, is not needed
by upper levels on an L1 cache miss and is stored locally in a miss status
holding register (MSHR). Each cache miss is allocated an MSHR before
being sent higher up the hierarchy, and is queued if none are available. When
a miss returns, the MSHR data are retrieved and the entry deallocated.
Cache writes can miss just like cache reads. On a write miss one can write
around the cache or allocate a line and write to the cache. If a line is
allocated, the remainder of the line must be fetched from memory, since the
write provides only one word. The missing write operation does not need

--- Page 747 ---
this additional data to be considered complete. To avoid waiting
unnecessarily, writes may be stored in a write buffer until the rest of the
cache line is fetched. All loads must query the write buffer to read the most
recent data.
In multiprocessor systems, each processor (CPU) typically has its own,
private L1 cache. For correct operation, it is imperative that every read to a
particular address sees the most recent write to that address by any
processor. If multiple CPUs read a particular address, they each make a copy
in their private caches. On a write, all outstanding versions of a line must
either be invalidated or updated to keep the system coherent – i.e., so that
only the most recently written data will be read by a subsequent read.
Summary
Memory is a key part of most digital systems. A memory subsystem is
characterized by its capacity, latency, and bandwidth, and is composed of
one or more memory primitives such as SDDR DRAM chips or SRAM
arrays.
To build memory subsystems with larger capacity than an individual
primitive, multiple primitives can be combined via bit-slicing, banking, or
some combination of the two. If a subsystem with higher bandwidth than an
individual primitive is required, duplication or interleaving can be
employed. In an interleaved memory, multiple input ports are connected to
multiple banks of memory via a switch. More efficient scheduling is
achieved if multiple requests from each port are considered simultaneously –
to avoid head-of-line blocking.
A cache memory exploits locality in an access pattern by using a small,
fast memory to hold recently accessed data. When combined with a large,
slow backing memory, the cache makes the entire subsystem appear to be a
large, fast memory for most references – those that hit in the cache.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
The design of memory array circuits can be found in refs. [26], [49], and
[112].
Further reading about memory systems as a whole can be found in Jacob
et al. [60]. More information on memory interleaving and scheduling is in

--- Page 748 ---
Rau’s classic paper [95] and Bailey’s study of bank contention [6]. One
example of a computer that used prime-number interleaving was the
Burroughs scientific processor [69]. Memory access scheduling is detailed in
ref. [97].
The impacts of caches on CPU performance are throughly explained in
ref. [48], and coherency is detailed in refs. [101] and [30].
Exercises
25.1Memory addressing. For each of the following memories, state how
many bits are needed in order to address the full capacity. Also
explain which bits are used for byte selection, bank selection, and
word selection. Assume byte addressing, and that the bank selection
is done with the bits just after the byte select bits.
(a) One array with 2000 32-bit words.
(b) Eight bit-sliced arrays, each with 1000 16-bit words.
(c) Sixteen banked arrays, each with 512 128-bit words.
(d) Eight banks of 16 bit-sliced arrays, each array has 1000 64-bit
words.
25.2VHDL for SRAMs. Using the RAM primitive of Figure 8.54, write
the VHDL to implement the following:
(a) a memory of eight bit-sliced arrays, each with 1024 16-bit
words.
(b) a memory of 16 banked arrays, each with 512 128-bit words.
Only the needed bank should be activated.
25.3DRAM timings, I. Assume a DRAM has 5–5–5–12 timings.
Addresses are eight bits, with the upper four bits being row-select
and the lower four column-select. Answer (a) and (b) for the
following address stream: 01, 02, 03, 10, 20, a3, b3, 04, b1, b2.
(a) What is the total delay? (You must start and end with all rows
precharged.)
(b) If you can rearrange the requests at will, what is the new delay?
25.4DRAM timings, II. Compare a DRAM with an 800 MHz I/O clock
and 8–8–8 timings with one with a 1 GHz I/O clock and 12–8–8

--- Page 749 ---
timings (we are ignoring tRAS in this exercise). Which is faster for the
following access patterns?
(a) A series of completely random addresses that are always to
different rows.
(b) A series of addresses that are to an open row 99% of the time.
What percentage of accesses need to be to an open row in order to
get equal performance?
25.5Strided accesses. A matrix is accessed using a row index r and
column index c. Ifthe matrix is stored in row-major format, the
address offset from the base is rnc + c, where nc is the number of
columns. Column major offsets are accessed with an offset of r+nrc.
With an interleaved memory, which layout do you want to have for
the following C code (assume accesses can be done in parallel):
for(int i=0; i<nr; i++){
for(int j = 0; j<nc; j++){
sum += m[i][j]; //i is row idx, j is col idx
25.6Spatial locality and line size. Consider a cache with a one-word,
four-byte line size. With a particular workload, if a word at address a
is referenced, the next seven words at addresses a + 4, a + 8, ..., a +
28 will all be referenced with a probability of P = 0.95. That is, if we
reference a word 19 times out of 20, we also reference the next seven
words. One time in 20 we don’t reference the next seven words.
What happens to the hit rate of this cache on this workload as we
increase the line size to two words, four words, and eight words?
What happens to the demand on memory bandwidth at each of these
line sizes?
25.7Set-associativity. Caches need not be only fully associative or direct-
mapped. Designers can build caches that are two, four, ..., w-way set
associative. Each address can reside in any one of w locations.
Design and draw the block diagram of a four-way associative cache.
Each address is 32 bits and indexes each byte. A cache line is 64
bytes and there are in total 1024 sets (each of which has four ways).
You can use only SRAM arrays and must perform your access in one
(potentially long) cycle. Be sure to give all array sizes and explain

--- Page 750 ---
which address bits are used to index the arrays and which are stored
as tags.
25.8Worst-case access patterns. Using the minimum number of
addresses, describe an access pattern that never hits in each of the
following caches:
(a) a direct-mapped cache with n different sets;
(b) a fully associative cache with n entries;
(c) a w-way set-associative cache.
25.9Balls and bins. Assume that every request has an equal probability of
requesting one of n banks. The formula for the average number of
requests (E(r)) needed to be examined in order to have at least one
request to each bank is as follows:
(25.2)
(a) Plot this expectation as a function n.
(b) Being limited by design constraints, you can build only a 16-
input arbiter. How many banks can you fully utilize on average?
Your answer need not be a power of 2.
(c) Given a 256-input arbiter, how many banks, on average, would
you expect to get full throughput with?
25.10Fair arbitration. Write the VHDL for an arbiter that takes four high-
priority requests and four low-priority requests and outputs the eight
grant signals.
(a) Write the baseline module where low-priority requests can be
starved.
(b) Write a module that after four cycles of granting high-priority
requests will grant a low-priority request. Assume a static tie-
breaking scheme for requests of equal priority.
(c) Modify the above module to implement a round-robin way of
breaking ties within a class. That is, input 0 of 4 has the highest
priority until granted, then input 1 of 4 has highest priority, etc.

--- Page 751 ---
1 SRAM stands for static random-access memory; DRAM is an acronym for dynamic random-access
memory.
2 We are not considering non-volatile memories such as flash and disk that are used for persistent
storage.
3 Some RAMs have a minimum column multiplexing requirement of 2 or 4, making the widest RAM
built from a single array 128 or 64 bits wide, respectively.
4 Here, “fast” means able to make a random read or write access in 100 ns or less. Flash and disk
memory is of lower cost per bit but too slow to be used for main memory in many applications.
5 RCD stands for the RAS to CAS delay, terms from the days of asynchronous DRAM. Think of it as
the row to column delay.
6 In a double-data rate (DDR) memory, separate data words are transferred on each half of the clock
cycle.
7 For a double-data rate (DDR) memory, data are transferred at twice the clock rate, i.e., 1600MHz,
hence the DDR3-1600 designation for an 800 MHz part.
8 As we discuss in Section 25.4, such references are said to exhibit spatial locality.
9 Images that are “painted” onto objects displayed on screen.
10 A cache line – the block of data associated with one cache tag – is sometimes referred to as a cache
block.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 752 ---
Part VII
Asynchronous logic
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 753 ---
26
Asynchronous sequential circuits
Asynchronous sequential circuits have state that is not synchronized with
a clock. Like the synchronous sequential circuits we have studied up to
this point, they are realized by adding state feedback to combinational
logic that implements a next-state function. Unlike synchronous circuits,
the state variables of an asynchronous sequential circuit may change at
any point in time. This asynchronous state update – from next state to
current state – complicates the design process. We must be concerned with
hazards in the next-state function, since a momentary glitch may result in
an incorrect final state. We must also be concerned with races between
state variables on transitions between states whose encodings differ in
more than one variable.
In this chapter we look at the fundamentals of asynchronous sequential
circuits. We start by showing how to analyze combinational logic with
feedback by drawing a flow table. The flow table shows us which states
are stable, which are transient, and which are oscillatory. We then show
how to synthesize an asynchronous circuit from a specification by first
writing a flow table and then reducing the flow table to logic equations.
We see that state assignment is quite critical for asynchronous sequential
machines, since it determines when a potential race may occur. We show
that some races can be eliminated by introducing transient states.
After the introduction given in this chapter, we continue our discussion
of asynchronous circuits in Chapter 27 by looking at latches and flip-flops
as examples of asynchronous circuits.
26.1 FLOW-TABLE ANALYSIS

--- Page 754 ---
Recall from Section 14.1 that an asynchronous sequential circuit is formed
when a feedback path is placed around combinational logic, as shown in
Figure 26.1(a). To analyze such circuits, we break the feedback path as
shown in Figure 26.1(b) and write the equations for the next-state variables
as a function of the current-state variables and the inputs. We can then
reason about the dynamics of the circuit by exploring what happens when
the current-state variables are updated (in arbitrary order if multiple bits
change) with their new values.
Figure 26.1. Asynchronous sequential circuit. (a) A sequential circuit is formed when a feedback path
carrying state information is added to combinational logic. (b) To analyze an asynchronous sequential
circuit, we break the feedback path and look at how the next state depends on the current state.
At first, this may look just like the synchronous sequential circuits we
discussed in Section 14.2. In both cases we compute a next state on the basis
of the current state and input. What’s different is the dynamics of how the
current state is updated with the next state. Without a clocked state register,
the state of an asynchronous sequential circuit may change at any time
(asynchronously). When multiple bits of state are changing at the same time,
it can cause a condition called a race. The bits may change at different rates,
resulting in different end states. Also, a synchronous circuit will eventually
reach a steady state in which the next state and outputs will not change until
the next clock cycle. An asynchronous circuit, on the other hand, may never
reach a steady state. It is possible for it to oscillate indefinitely in the
absence of input changes.
We have already seen one example of analyzing an asynchronous circuit
in this manner – the RS flip-flop of Section 14.1. In this section we look at
some additional examples and introduce the flow table as a tool for the
analysis and synthesis of asynchronous circuits.
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 26.2(a). Each of the AND gates in
the figure is labeled with the input state ab during which it is enabled. For

--- Page 755 ---
example, the top gate, labeled 00, is enabled when a and b are low. To
analyze the circuit, we break the feedback loop, as shown in Figure 26.2(b).
At this point, we can write down the next-state function in terms of the
inputs, a and b, and the current state. This function is shown in tabular form
in the flow table of Figure 26.2(c).
Figure 26.2. Example asynchronous sequential circuit. (a) Original circuit. (b) With feedback loop
broken. (c) Flow table showing next-state function. Circled entries in the flow table are stable states.
Figure 26.2(c) shows the next state for each of the eight combinations of
inputs and current state. Input states are shown horizontally in Gray-code
order. Current states are shown vertically. If the next state is the same as the
current state, this state is stable, since updating the current state with the
next state doesn’t change anything. If the next state is different than the
current state, this state is transient, since, as soon as the current state is
updated with the next state, the circuit will change state.

--- Page 756 ---
For example, suppose the circuit has inputs ab = 00 and the current state is
0. The next state is also 0, so this is a stable state – as shown by the circled 0
in the leftmost position of the top row of the table. If from this state input b
goes high, making the input state ab = 01, we move one square to the right
in the table. In this case, the 01 AND gate is enabled and the next state is 1.
This is an unstable or transient situation since the current state and next state
are different. After some amount of time (for the change to propagate), the
current state will become 1 and we move to the bottom row of the table. At
this point, we have reached a stable state since the current and next state are
now both 1.
If there is a cycle of transient states with no stable states we have an
oscillation. For example, if the inputs to the circuit of Figure 26.2 are ab =
11, the next state is always the complement of the current state. With this
input state, the circuit is never stable, but instead will oscillate indefinitely
between the 0 and 1 states. This is hardly ever a desired behavior. An
oscillation in an asynchronous circuit is almost always an error.
So, what does the circuit of Figure 26.2 do? By this point, the astute
reader will have realized that it is an RS flip-flop with an added oscillation
feature. Input a is the reset input. When a is high and b is low, the state is
made 0; when a is lowered, the state remains 0. Similarly, b is the set input.
Making b high while a is low sets the state to 1 and it remains at 1 when b is
lowered. The only difference between this flip-flop and the one of Figure
14.2 is the addition of the middle AND gate, labeled 11. When both inputs
are high, this gate causes the circuit of Figure 26.2 to oscillate, whereas the
circuit of Figure 14.2 resets. If gate 11 and the b input to gate 00 are
removed, the circuit becomes identical to that of Figure 14.2. To simplify our
analysis of asynchronous circuits, we typically insist that the environment in
which the circuits operate obey the fundamental-mode restriction:
Fundamental-mode restriction Only one input bit may be
changed at a time and the circuit must reach a stable state before
another input bit is changed.
A circuit operated in fundamental mode need only worry about one input bit
changing at a time. Multiple-bit input changes are not allowed. Our setup-
and hold-time restrictions on flip-flops are examples of a fundamental-mode
restriction. The clock and data inputs of the flip-flop are not allowed to
change at the same time. After the data input has changed, the circuit must
be allowed to reach a steady state (setup time) before the clock input can

--- Page 757 ---
change. Similarly, after the clock input has changed, the circuit must be
allowed to reach a steady state (hold time) before the data input can change.
We will look at the relation of setup and hold time to the design of the
asynchronous circuits that realize flip-flops in more detail in Chapter 27.
In looking at a flow table, like the one in Figure 26.2, operating in the
fundamental mode means that we need only consider input transitions to
adjacent squares (including wrapping from leftmost to rightmost). Thus, we
don’t have to worry about what happens when the input changes from 11
(oscillating) to 00 (storing). This can’t happen. Since only one input can
change at a time, we must first visit state 10 (reset) or 01 (set) before getting
to 00.
In some real-world situations, it is not possible to restrict the inputs to
operating in fundamental mode. In these cases we need to consider multiple
input changes. This topic is beyond the scope of this book, and the interested
reader is referred to some of the texts listed in the bibliographic notes at the
end of this chapter.
26.2 FLOW-TABLE SYNTHESIS: THE
TOGGLE CIRCUIT
We now understand how to use a flow table to analyze the behavior of an
asynchronous circuit. That is, given a schematic, we can draw a flow table
and understand the function of the circuit. In this section we will use a flow
table in the other direction. We will see how to create a flow table from the
specification of a circuit and then use that flow table to synthesize a
schematic for a circuit that realizes the specification.
Consider the specification of a toggle circuit – shown graphically in
Figure 26.3. The toggle circuit has a single input in and two outputs a and
b.1 Whenever in is low, both outputs are low. The first time in goes high,
output a goes high. On the next rising transition of in, output b goes high.
On the third rising input, a goes high again. The circuit continues steering
pulses on in alternately between a and b.

--- Page 758 ---
Figure 26.3. A toggle circuit alternates pulses on its input in between its two outputs a and b.
The first step in synthesizing a toggle circuit is to write down its flow
table. We can do this directly from the waveforms of Figure 26.3. Each
transition of the input potentially takes us to a new state. Thus, we can
partition the waveform into potential states, as shown in Figure 26.4. We
start in state A. When in rises we go to state B, where output a is high. When
in falls again we go to state C. Even though C has the same output as A, we
know it is a different state because the next transition on in will cause a
different output. The second rising edge on in takes us to state D with output
b high. When in falls for the second time, we go back to state A. We know
that this state is the same as state A since the behavior of the circuit at this
point under all possible inputs is indistinguishable from where we started.
Figure 26.4. A flow table is created from the specification of the toggle circuit by creating a new state
for every input transition until the circuit is obviously back to the same state.

--- Page 759 ---
Once we have a flow table for the toggle circuit, the next step is to assign
binary codes to each of the states. This state assignment is more critical than
with synchronous machines. If two states X and Y differ in more than one
state bit, a transition from X to Y requires first visiting a transient state with
one state bit changed before arriving at Y. In some cases, a race between the
two state bits may result. We discuss races in more detail in Section 26.3.
For now, we pick a state assignment (shown in Figure 26.5(a)) where each
state transition switches only a single bit.
Figure 26.5. Implementing the toggle circuit from its flow table. (a) Flow table with state assignment.
(b) Flow table mapped to Karnaugh map. (c) Next-state codes mapped to Karnaugh map. (d)
Karnaugh map for s0. (e) Karnaugh map for s1.

--- Page 760 ---
With the state assignment, realizing the logic for the toggle circuit is a
simple matter of combinational logic synthesis. We redraw the flow table as
a Karnaugh map in Figure 26.5(b). The Karnaugh map shows the symbolic
next-state function; i.e., each square shows the next-state name (A through
D) for that input and current state. The arrows show the path through the
states followed during operation of the circuit. Understanding this path is
important for avoiding races and hazards. We refer to this Karnaugh map
showing the state transitions as a trajectory map, since it shows the
trajectory of the state variables.
We redraw the Karnaugh map with state names replaced by their binary
codes in Figure 26.5(c), and separate maps for the two state variables s0 and
s1 are shown in Figures 26.5(d) and (e), respectively. From these Karnaugh
maps we write down the equations for s0 and s1:
s0 =(s1 ∧  in) ∨  (s0 ∧  in) ∨  (s0 ∧  s1), (26.1)
s1 =(s1 ∧  in) ∨  (s0 ∧  in) ∨  (s0 ∧  s1). (26.2)
The last implicant in each expression is required in order to avoid a hazard
that would otherwise occur. Asynchronous circuits must be hazard-free along
their path through the input/state space. Because the current state is being
constantly fed back, a glitch during a state transition can result in the circuit
switching to a different state – and hence not implementing the desired
function. For example, suppose we left the s0 ∧  s1 term out of Equation
(26.2). When in goes low in state B, s0 might go momentarily low before s1
comes high. At this point, the middle term of both equations becomes false
and s1 never goes high – the circuit goes to state A rather than C.
All that remains to complete our synthesis is to write the output equations.
Output a is true in state 01 and output b is true in state 10. The equations are
thus given by
a = s1 ∧  s0, (26.3)
b = s1 ∧  s0. (26.4)

--- Page 761 ---
EXAMPLE 26.1 Divide-by-3 circuit
Design an asynchronous sequential circuit with input a and output q, where output q transitions once
for every three transitions on input a.
The waveform in Figure 26.6 shows operation of this circuit. Names for each asynchronous state
are labeled. It is straightforward to draw the flow table from the waveform (see Figure 26.7) The
second column of the flow table shows our state assignment qrs. We choose output q to be one state
variable and add two additional variables r and s to distinguish the six states. We choose our
assignment so that only a single state variable changes between adjacent states, in order to avoid races.
Figure 26.6. Waveform showing the operation of a divide-by-3 asynchronous circuit, designed in
Example 26.1.
Figure 26.7. Flow table showing state transitions for the divide-by-3 asynchronous circuit of Example
26.1.
Using this state assignment we write the trajectory map and the K-maps for each state variable, as
shown in Figure 26.8. From the K-maps we identify the prime implicants and write the logic equations
for each state variable. We are careful to cover all of the transitions along the trajectory to avoid
critical hazards. It is interesting that each of the three state variables is realized by a single majority
gate. The equations are as follows:
q =(q ∧  r) ∨  (q ∧  a) ∨  (a ∧  r),
r =(r ∧  s) ∨  (r ∧  a) ∨  (s ∧  a),
s =(s ∧  q) ∨  (s ∧  a) ∨  (q ∧  a).

--- Page 762 ---
Figure 26.8. Trajectory map (a) and Karnaugh maps (b)–(d) for each state variable in the divide-by-3
circuit of Example 26.1.
A VHDL design entity implementing these equations is shown in Figure 26.9. We add a reset signal
rst to initialize the state variables.
Figure 26.9. VHDL implementation for the divide-by-3 circuit of Example 26.1.
Simulating this VHDL model gives the waveforms shown in Figure 26.10. In addition to generating
the divide-by-3 waveform on q state variables, r and s also provide divide-by-3 waveforms with a
phase shift of a half cycle. This makes the circuit a three-phase generator.
Figure 26.10. Simulated waveform of the VHDL divide-by-3 module from Example 26.1.

--- Page 763 ---
26.3 RACES AND STATE ASSIGNMENT
To illustrate the problem of multiple state variables changing simultaneously,
consider an alternative state assignment for the toggle circuit shown in
Figure 26.11(a). Here we observe that the two outputs, a and b, can also
serve as state variables, so we can add to the outputs just one additional state
variable c to distinguish between states A and C, giving the codes shown in
the figure.2
Figure 26.11. An alternative state assignment for the toggle circuit requires multiple state variables to
change on a single transition. (a) Flow table with revised state assignment. (b) Trajectory map
showing the introduction of transient states B1 = 010 and D1 = 101.
With this state assignment, the transition from state A (cab = 000) to state
B (110) changes both c and a. If the logic is designed so that in going high in
state A makes both c and a go high, they could change in an arbitrary order.
Variable a could change first, variable c could change first, or they could
change simultaneously. If they change simultaneously, we go from state A
directly to state B with no intermediate stops. If a changes first, we go first
to state 010, which is not assigned, and then, if the logic in state 010 does the
right thing, to state 110. If c changes first, the machine will go to state C
(100), where the high input will then drive it to state D. Clearly, we cannot
allow c to change first. This situation where multiple state variables can
change at the same time is called a race. The state variables are racing to see
which one can change first. When the outcome of the race affects the end
state – as in this case – we call the race a critical race.

--- Page 764 ---
To avoid the critical race that could occur if we allow both a and c to
change at the same time, we specify the next-state function so that only a
can change in state A. This takes us to a transient state 010, which we will
call B1. When the machine reaches state B1, the next-state logic then
enables c to change.
The introduction of this transient state is illustrated in the trajectory map
of Figure 26.11(b). When the input goes high in state A, the next-state
function specifies B1 rather than B. This enables only a single transition,
downward as shown by the arrow, which corresponds to a rising, to state B1
(corresponding to the square marked B). A change in c is not enabled in state
A, in order to avoid a horizontal transition into the square marked D1. Once
the machine reaches state B1, the next-state function becomes B, which
enables the change in c, a horizontal transition, to stable state B.
A transient state is also required for the transition from state C 100 to state
D 001. Both variables c and b change between these two states. An
uncontrolled race in which variable c changes first could wind up in state B
110, which is not correct. To prevent this race, we enable only b to change
when in rises in state C. This takes us to a transient state D1 (101). Once in
state D1, c is allowed to fall, taking us to state D (001).
Figure 26.12 illustrates the process of implementing the revised toggle
circuit. Figure 26.12(a) shows a Karnaugh map of the next-state function.
Each square of the Karnaugh map shows the code for the next state for that
present state and input. Note that where the next state equals the present
state, the state is stable. Transient state B1 (at 010 – the second square along
the diagonal) is not stable since it has a next state of 110.

--- Page 765 ---
Figure 26.12. Implementation of the toggle circuit with the alternative state assignment of Figure
26.11(a). (a) Karnaugh map showing three-bit next-state function c, a, b. (b) Karnaugh map for a. (c)
Karnaugh map for b. (d) Karnaugh map for c.
From the next-state Karnaugh map, we can write the individual Karnaugh
maps for each state variable. Figures 26.12(b)–(d) show the Karnaugh maps
for the individual variables a, b, and c, respectively. Note that the states that
are not visited along the state trajectory (the blank squares in Figure
26.12(a)) are don’t cares. The machine will never be in these states, thus we
don’t care what the next-state function is in an unvisited state.
From these Karnaugh maps, we write the state variable equations as
follows:
(26.5)
(26.6)
(26.7)

--- Page 766 ---
Note that we do not require separate equations for output variables since a
and b are both state variables and output variables.
EXAMPLE 26.2 One-hot toggle circuit
Design a toggle circuit using a one-hot state assignment. Describe how you resolve any potential
races.
We use our outputs a and b as the one-hot variables representing states B and D, respectively, and
add two new state variables r and s representing states A and C, respectively. So, writing the state as
bsar, our state assignment is A = 0001, B = 0010, C = 0100, and D = 1000. Two state variables need to
change on every state transition, leading to four potential races.
A five-variable transition map for the one-hot toggle circuit is shown in Figure 26.13. When in goes
high in state A = 0001, we direct the machine to transient state B1 = 0011, which then switches to state
B = 0010. The flow of total state here (in plus state) is {in,A} (00001), {in,A} (10001), {in,B1}
(10011), {in,B} (10001). Note that we could allow a race here, by allowing a transition through either
B1 (0011) or B2 (0000), but have chosen not to. We revisit this decision in Exercises 26.12 to 26.15.
Figure 26.13. Five-variable state transition map for the one-hot toggle circuit of Example 26.2.
When in goes low in B, we transfer first to C1 = 0110 and then to C = 0100. Again, we could
choose to allow a race through either C1 or C2 = 0000 to C, but have chosen not to. Note that C2 =
0000 does not conflict with B2 = 0000 because C2 is a transient state when in is low and B2 is a
transient state when in is high. In other words, the total state – input and internal state – of C2 is
00000, while the total state of B2 is 10000.
Similarly, on the transfer from C to D we force a transition through D1 = 1100. We could allow a
race here through either D1 or B2, but only if we choose not to allow a race to B – since B2 can
transfer to D or B but not both.
Finally, we force the transition from D to A to pass through A1 = 1001. We could allow a race to go
through either A1 or C2, but only if we choose not to allow a race to C.
The K-maps for the four state variables are shown in Figure 26.14.

--- Page 767 ---
Figure 26.14. Karnaugh maps used to derive the logic equations for the four state variables in
Example 26.2.
Writing the logic equations for the state variables from these K-maps, we have
r =(b ∧  in) ∨  (r ∧  a),
a =(r ∧  in) ∨  (a ∧  s),
s =(a ∧  in) ∨  (s ∧  b),
b =(s ∧  in) ∨  (b ∧  r).
There is a pleasing symmetry to these logic equations. Each one-hot state variable is realized with
an RS flip-flop. The first term of each equation is the set term that sets a state variable when the
previous-state variable is set and the input switches to the appropriate state. The second term of each
equation is the reset term that clears a state variable when the next-state variable is set.
General one-hot asynchronous circuits can be realized in a similar manner. For each state variable x,
write a set equation S with a term for every transition into that state and a reset set R of states that can
follow that state. The equation for x can then be written as
x = S ∨  (x ∧  ∑ R). (26.8)
That is, any transition into state X corresponding to variable x sets x and any state that follows x clears
x. These rules can be used only for asynchronous state machines, where the minimum cycle includes
at least three states.
Summary

--- Page 768 ---
In this chapter you have learned how to analyze and design asynchronous
sequential circuits, logic circuits with state feedback that is not interrupted
by a clocked storage element. Each state variable in an asynchronous circuit
may change at any time and in any order, leading to races between the
variables. Care must be taken to ensure that the circuit functions correctly
for all possible outcomes of the race.
A flow table is used to both design and analyze asynchronous sequential
circuits. A flow table is just a state table, listing the next state (with feedback
loops broken) as a function of the current state and inputs. Stable states –
where the next state and the current state are the same – are circled.
A circuit where at most one input changes at a time is said to obey the
fundamental-mode assumption. After each single-bit input transition, no
input is allowed to change again until the circuit has reached a steady state.
This assumption simplifies analysis by restricting horizontal transitions in
the flow table to those involving a single input.
Synthesis of asynchronous sequential circuits is similar to that of
synchronous circuits except that careful attention to the state assignment is
needed in order to avoid races. We start by translating the specification into a
flow table. Next, we generate a state assignment that avoids multiple state
bits changing simultaneously. This may require inserting new transient
states. Finally, we generate the logic for the resulting next-state function. It
is important that the logic be hazard-free along trajectories that may be
followed in the flow table.
For the rare cases when you need an asynchronous circuit, flow-table
analysis and synthesis is an invaluable skill. Too often engineers without this
skill attempt to design a circuit like the toggle module in an ad hoc manner.
They cobble together flip-flops and latches clocked by both edges of the
clock along with a random assortment of gates. The results are at best
disappointing and often disastrous. With an understanding of flow tables and
races, you can build efficient asynchronous circuits that operate reliably.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
Many early computer designs were completely asynchronous, such as the
ORDVAC [78] and ILLIAC II [16]. Over time, however, the simplicity of
synchronous design won out. Almost all modern digital systems are largely
synchronous, with asynchronous design reserved for a few special cases.

--- Page 769 ---
Ivan Sutherland’s Turing Award Lecture [103] provides an interesting
perspective on asynchronous logic. Research on asynchronous design
continues and is reported in the IEEE International Symposium on
Asynchronous Circuits and Systems each year. Texts on the topic include
refs. [68], [86], and [108].
Exercises
26.1Schematic analysis. Write the flow table for the schematic in Figure
26.15. Explain the function of the circuit.
Figure 26.15. Schematic for Exercise 26.1.
26.2Synthesis. A phase comparator takes two input signals with the same
frequency and transforms them into a voltage, indicating the degree
to which they are in phase (aligned). This problem explores the
digital portion of the design. Write a flow table for a basic phase
comparator that has two inputs a and b and two outputs A and B. The
initial state is to have A = B = 0. On a rising edge of a, the output
should either transition from (AB) 00 to 10 or from 01 to 00, and
should be stable in any other state. On a rising edge of b the
transition should be from 10 to 00 or from 00 to 01. Synthesize a
gate-level circuit from your flow table. The analog portion of the
design translates the amount of time either A or B is high into a
voltage magnitude.
26.3Toggle synthesis. Synthesize a version of the toggle circuit where the
state assignments are as in Figure 26.11(a), except that state B is
encoded as cab = 010.
26.4Edge toggle. The toggle circuit of Section 26.2 is a pulse toggle – a
circuit in which alternate pulses on the input alternate between the

--- Page 770 ---
two outputs. For this exercise, design an edge toggle – a circuit in
which edges on the input cause edges that alternate between the two
outputs. The waveform of this circuit is shown in Figure 26.16.
Figure 26.16. Waveform for Exercise 26.4.
26.5Three-way toggle. Design a toggle circuit like the one in Section 26.2
except that pulses on the input alternate over three outputs.
26.6Three-way edge toggle. Modify the edge circuit of Exercise 26.4 to
alternate edges between three outputs.
26.7Divide-by-3 circuit. Re-implement the divide-by-3 circuit of
Example 26.1 using the following state assignment: A = 000, B =
100, C = 110, D = 111, E = 011, F = 001.
26.8Divide-by-5 circuit. Design a divide-by-5 asynchronous circuit, like
the divide-by-3 circuit of Example 26.1, except that it produces one
transition on the output for every five transitions on the input.
26.9Divide-by-3 halves circuit. Design a circuit that accepts quadrature
inputs i and q (inputs that have a 50% duty factor and are 90 degrees
out of phase) and generates an output x that has one transition for
every three transitions on i and q combined. The desired behavior is
illustrated in Figure 26.17.
Figure 26.17. Waveform for Exercise 26.9.
26.10State reduction. Write a flow table for the toggle circuit, but this time
creating a new state for each of the first eight transitions on in. Then

--- Page 771 ---
determine which states are equivalent, in order to reduce your flow
table to a four-state table.
26.11 Races. Design a circuit that when input c is high counts from 0 to 4
using standard binary notation (and wraps). If c is low, the circuit will
simply hold its state. In your first implementation (part (a)), ignore all
data races. For part (b), enumerate all the possible races and potential
incorrect sequences of states.
26.12One-hot toggle, I. Write the logic equations for the one-hot toggle
circuit of Example 26.2, allowing a race in the transfer from A to B.
26.13One-hot toggle, II. Write the logic equations for the one-hot toggle
circuit of Example 26.2, allowing a race in the transfer from B to C.
26.14One-hot toggle, III. Write the logic equations for the one-hot toggle
circuit of Example 26.2, allowing races in the transfers from A to B
and from D to A.
26.15One-hot toggle, IV. In the one-hot toggle circuit of Example 26.2 is it
possible to allow races both from A to B and from C to D? If it is,
write the logic equations for a circuit that does so; if not, explain why
this is not possible.
1 In practice, a reset input rst is also required, in order to initialize the state of the circuit.
2 Note that the bit ordering of the codes is c, a, b.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 772 ---
27
Flip-flops
Flip-flops are among the most critical circuits in a modern digital system.
As we have seen in previous chapters, flip-flops are central to all
synchronous sequential logic. Registers (built from flip-flops) hold the
state (both control and data state) of all of our finite-state machines. In
addition to this central role in logic design, flip-flops also consume a large
fraction of the die area, power, and cycle time of a typical digital system.
Until now, we have considered a flip-flop as a black box.1 In this
chapter, we study the internal workings of the flip-flop. We derive the
logic design of a typical D flip-flop and show how the timing properties
introduced in Chapter 15 follow from this design.
We first develop the flip-flop design informally – following an intuitive
argument. We start by developing the latch. The implementation of a latch
follows directly from its specification. From the implementation we can
then derive the setup, hold, and delay times of the latch. We then see how
to build a flip-flop by combining two latches in a master–slave
arrangement. The timing properties of the flip-flop can then be derived
from its implementation.
Following this informal development, we then derive the design of a
latch and flip-flop using flow-table synthesis. This serves both to reinforce
the properties of these storage elements and to give a good example of
flow-table synthesis. We introduce the concept of state equivalence during
this derivation. This formal derivation can be skipped by a casual reader.
27.1 INSIDE A LATCH

--- Page 773 ---
A schematic symbol for a latch is shown in Figure 27.1(a), and waveforms
illustrating its behavior and timing are shown in Figure 27.1(b). A latch has
two inputs, data d and enable g, and one output, q. When the enable input is
high, the output follows the input. When the enable input is low, the output
holds its current state.
Figure 27.1. A latch: (a) schematic symbol; (b) waveforms showing timing properties.
As shown in Figure 27.1(b), a latch, like a flip-flop, has a setup time ts and
a hold time th. An input must be setup ts before the enable falls and held for
th after the enable has fallen in order for the input value to be correctly
stored. Latch delay is characterized by both delay from the enable rising to
the output changing, tdGQ, and delay from the data input changing to the
output changing, tdDQ. For the enable to dominate the delay, the input must
be set up at least ts1 before the enable rises. Usually, this is just a question of
which signal (d or g) is on the critical path, and ts1 = tdDQ − tdGQ. As we shall
see below, these times can be derived from the logic design of the latch and
the need to meet the fundamental-mode restriction (Section 26.1) during
latch operation.
From the description of a latch, we can write down its logic equation:
q = (g ∧  d) ∨  (g ∧  q). (27.1)
That is, when g is true, q = d, andwheng is false, q holds its state (q = q).
This is almost correct. As can be seen from the Karnaugh map of Figure
27.2, there is a hazard that may occur when g changes state and both d and q
are high. To cover this hazard, we must add an additional implicant to the
equation, as follows:
q = (g ∧  d) ∨  (g ∧  q) ∨  (d ∧  q). (27.2)

--- Page 774 ---
Figure 27.2. Karnaugh map for a latch.
From Equation (27.2) we can draw a gate-level schematic for a latch, as
shown in Figure 27.3(a). This implementation of a latch is often called an
Earle latch after its original developer. For a CMOS implementation, we can
redraw the Earle latch using only inverting gates (an inverter and four
NAND gates), as shown in Figure 27.3(b).
Figure 27.3. Gate-level schematic of an Earle latch. (a) Using abstract AND and OR gates. (b) CMOS
implementation using only inverting gates.
From the schematic of Figure 27.3, we can now derive the timing
properties of the latch. Let the delay of gate Ui in the figure be ti – in
practice, we would calculate the delay of these gates as described in Section
5.4 – and the delays may be different for rising and falling edges and for
different states. First consider the setup time, ts. To meet the fundamental-
mode restriction, after changing input d, the circuit must be allowed to reach
a stable state before input g falls. For the circuit to reach a stable state, the
change in d (rising or falling) must propagate through gates U4, U5, and U3
in that order, and both state variable q and the output of gate U3 must reach a
stable state before g falls. This delay, and hence the setup time, is calculated
as
ts = t4 + t5 + t3. (27.3)

--- Page 775 ---
This setup calculation illustrates some of the subtlety of asynchronous
circuit analysis. One might assume that since d is connected directly to U3,
the path from d to the output of U3 would be direct – d to U3. However, this
is not the case when d is low. If d is low and the circuit is stable, then q is
low. Thus, when d rises, it does not switch U3, because q, the other input of
U3, is low. The change on d has to propagate through U4 and U5, making q
high, before U3 switches. Hence the path that must stabilize is d to U4 to U5
to U3.
Now consider hold time. After g falls, the circuit must again come to a
steady state before d can change again. In particular, if d is high, the change
on g must propagate through U1 and U2 to enable the loop of U2 and U5
before d is allowed to fall. Hence the hold time is just given by
th = t1 + t2. (27.4)
To complete our analysis, we see that each propagation delay is just the
delay from an input g or d to the output q. FortdDQ this path includes gates
U3, U4, and U5, and for tdGQ the path is through U4 and U5 (recall that we
are worried only about g rising here). Thus we have
tdDQ = max(t3, t4) + t5, (27.5)
tdGQ = t4 + t5. (27.6)
An alternative gate implementation of a latch is shown in Figure 27.4.
Here we construct a latch by appending a gating circuit to an RS flip-flop
(Section 14.1). The RS flip-flop is formed by NAND gates U4 and U5.
When the upper input of U4, s, is asserted (low), the flip-flop is set (q = 1, q
= 0). When the lower input of U5, r, is asserted (low), the flip-flop is reset (q
= 0, q = 1).

--- Page 776 ---
Figure 27.4. Latch built from an RS flip-flop.
The gating circuit, formed by U1, U2, and U3, sets the flip-flop when g =
1 and kd = 1, and resets the flip-flop when g = 1 and d = 0. Thus, when g is
high, the output q follows input d. When g is low, the flip-flop is neither set
nor reset, and holds its previous state.
While the latch of Figure 27.4 has identical logical behavior to the Earle
latch of Figure 27.3, it has very different timing properties. We leave
derivation of these timing properties as Exercises 27.1–27.4.
27.2 INSIDE A FLIP-FLOP
An edge-triggered D-type flip-flop updates its output with the current state
of its input on the rising edge of the clock. At all other times the output holds
its current state. The schematic symbol and timing diagram of a D flip-flop
are shown in Figure 27.5 (repeated from Figure 15.5). In Section 14.2 we
saw how D flip-flops are used for the state registers of synchronous
sequential circuits, and in Chapter 15 we looked at the detailed timing
properties of the D flip-flop. In this section, we derive a logic design for the
D flip-flop and see how this logic design gives rise to the timing properties
of the flip-flop.
Figure 27.5. Edge-triggered D flip-flop: (a) schematic symbol; (b) timing diagram showing behavior.

--- Page 777 ---
A latch with a negated enable does half of what we need to make a flip-
flop. It samples its input when the enable rises, and holds the output steady
while the negated enable is high. The problem is that its output follows its
input when the negated enable is low. We can use a second latch, in series
with the first, to correct this behavior. This latch, with a normal enable,
prevents the output from changing when the enable is low.
A D flip-flop implemented with two latches in series with complemented
enables is shown in Figure 27.6(a). Waveforms illustrating the operation of
the flip-flop are shown in Figure 27.6(b). The first latch, called the master,
samples the input on the rising edge of the clock onto intermediate signal m.
In the waveforms, value b is sampled and held steady on m while the clock is
high. Signal m, however, follows the input when the clock is low. The
second latch, called the slave (because it follows the master), enables the
data captured on signal m onto the output when the clock is high. When the
clock falls, it samples this value – still held steady by the master – and holds
this value on the output when the clock is low. The net result of the two
latches is a device that acts as a D flip-flop. It samples the data on the rising
edge of the clock, and holds it steady until the next rising edge. The master
holds the value when the clock is high – while the slave is transparent, and
the slave holds the value when the clock is low – while the master is
transparent.
Figure 27.6. A master–slave D flip-flop is constructed from two latches.
For correct operation of the master–slave flip-flop, it is critical that the
output of the master does not change until th after the slave clock has fallen.
That is, the hold-time constraint of the slave must be met. If the output of the
master latch were to change too quickly after the clock has fallen, the new
value on intermediate signal m (value of d in the waveform) could race
through to the output before the slave latch blocks its flow. In practice, this is

--- Page 778 ---
rarely a problem unless there is a large amount of clock skew (Section 15.4)
between the master and slave latches.
From the schematic of Figure 27.6(a) and the timing properties of the
latch, we can derive the timing properties of the flip-flop. The setup and hold
times of the flip-flop are just the setup and hold times of the master latch.
This is the device doing the sampling. The delay of the flip-flop, tdCQ, is the
delay of the slave latch, tdGQ.2 The output q changes to the new value, tdGQ,
after the clock rises.
To illustrate the timing parameters of the D flip-flop in a more concrete
way, consider the gate-level schematic of Figure 27.7. This figure shows the
master–slave flip-flop of Figure 27.6 expanded out to the gate level. The
inverter on the enable input of each latch has been factored out to a single
inverter U1 that generates clk. The polarities of the clock connection to the
master and slave are opposite.
Figure 27.7. Gate-level schematic of a master–slave D flip-flop.
The setup time, ts, of the flip-flop shown in Figure 27.7 is the amount of
time required for the circuit to reach a steady state after d changes when clk
is low.
Strictly speaking, the path here is through U4, U5, and U3 or U7 (if q is
high). However, we don’t really care whether the output of U7 reaches
steady state or not since the clock is about to go high, enabling U8. So we
ignore U7 and focus on the path that ends at the output of U3, giving
ts = t4 + t5 + t3 = tsm, (27.7)

--- Page 779 ---
where tsm is the setup time of the master latch.
The hold time of this flip-flop is the time for the master part of the circuit
to settle after the clock has risen. This is just the maximum delay of gates U1
and U2. If the data changes before U1 has brought clk low, state m might be
affected. Similarly, the data cannot change until the output of U2 has
stabilized or we may lose the value stored in the master latch. Thus we have
th = max(t1, t2). (27.8)
Compared with Equation (27.4), we don’t add t1 to t2 here because, with the
low-true enable of the master latch, U1 is not in the path from clk to the
output of U2.
For hold-time calculation, we are concerned only with the master latch
reaching steady state. When the clock rises, it may take longer for the slave
to reach steady state. However, we will capture the data reliably as long as
the master reaches steady state.
Finally, tdCQ is the delay from the clock rising to the output of the flip-
flop. The path here is through U8 and U9, giving
tdCQ = t8 + t9 = tdGQs, (27.9)
where tdGQs is tdGQ for the slave latch.
An alternative gate-level schematic for a master–slave D flip-flop is
shown in Figure 27.8. This circuit uses the RS-flip-flop-based latch of
Figure 27.4 for the master and slave latches of the flip-flop. We leave the
derivation of ts, th, and tdCQ for this flip-flop as Exercises 27.5–27.7.


--- Page 780 ---
Figure 27.8. Alternative gate-level schematic of a master–slave D flip-flop.
27.3 CMOS LATCHES AND FLIP-FLOPS
The latch circuits of either Figure 27.3 or Figure 27.4 use static CMOS
gates. CMOS technology, however, also permits us to construct a latch with
a transmission gate and a tri-state inverter, as shown in Figure 27.9. Most
CMOS latches use transmission gates in this style because this results in a
latch that is both smaller and faster than the alternative gate circuits.
Figure 27.9. CMOS latch circuit using a transmission gate and a tri-state inverter.
When enable g is high (and g is low), the transmission gate formed by
NFET M1 and PFET M2 is on, allowing the value on input d to pass to
storage node s. Ifd = 1, PFET M2 passes the 1 from d to s, and, if d = 0,
NFET M1 passes the 0 from d to s. Output q follows storage node s buffered
by inverters U2 and U4. Thus, when g is high, the output q follows input d.
When enable g goes low, the transmission gate formed by M1 and M2
turns off isolating storage node s from the input. At this time, the input is
sampled onto the storage node. At the same time, tri-state inverter U3 turns
on, closing a storage loop from s back to s through two inverters. This
feedback loop reinforces the stored value, allowing it to be retained
indefinitely. The tri-state inverter is equivalent to an inverter followed by a
transmission gate.
We can calculate the setup, hold, and delay times of the CMOS latch in
the same manner as we did for the gate-based latches. When the input
changes while g is high, the effect of the change on the storage loop must
settle out before g is allowed to fall. The input change must propagate
through the transmission gate and inverter U2. We need not wait for U4 to
drive output q since that does not affect the storage loop. Thus, the setup
time is given by

--- Page 781 ---
ts = tg + t2, (27.10)
where tg is the delay of the transmission gate.
After g goes low, we need to hold the value on input d until the
transmission gate is completely shut off. This is just the delay of inverter U1:
th = t1. (27.11)
We do not need to wait for feedback gate U3 to turn on. Its output, storage
node s,isalreadyin the correct state, and there is sufficient capacitance on
node s to hold its value steady until U3 turns on.
The delay times are calculated by tracing the path from input to output:
tdGQ = t1 + tg + t2 + t4, (27.12)
tdDQ = tg + t2 + t4. (27.13)
A CMOS flip-flop can be constructed from two CMOS latches, as shown
in Figure 27.10. The master latch, formed by NFET M1, PFET M2, inverter
U2, and tri-state inverter U3, connects input d to storage node m when
enable g is low and holds m when g is high. The slave latch, formed by
NFET M3, PFET M4, inverter U4, and tri-state inverter U5, connects master
latch state m to storage node s when enable g is high. An additional inverter,
U6, generates output q. Output q is logically identical to node s at the output
of U4. Isolating the output from the storage loop in this manner, however, is
critical for the synchronization properties of the flip-flop, as discussed in
Chapter 29. We leave the analysis of this flip-flop as Exercises 27.8–27.10.

--- Page 782 ---
Figure 27.10. A CMOS flip-flop circuit is constructed from two CMOS latches.
27.4 FLOW-TABLE DERIVATION OF THE
LATCH
The latch and flip-flop are themselves asynchronous circuits and can be
synthesized using the flow-table technique we developed in Chapter 26.
Given an English-language description of a latch, we can write a flow table
for the latch, as shown in Figure 27.11. To enumerate the states, we start
with one state – all inputs and outputs low (state A) – and from this state we
toggle each input. We then repeat this process from each new state until all
possible states have been explored.

--- Page 783 ---
Figure 27.11. Flow-table synthesis of a latch: (a) waveforms; (b) flow table; (c) reduced flow table.
In state A, toggling g high takes us to state B, and toggling d high takes us
to state F. This gives us the first line of the flow table of Figure 27.11(b). In
state B, toggling g low takes us back to state A, and toggling d high takes us
to state C, with q high. This gives us the second line of the flow table. We
continue in this way, constructing the flow table line by line until all states
have been explored. The end result is the table of Figure 27.11(b).
In constructing this flow table we have created a new state for each input
combination that didn’t obviously match a previous state. This gives us six
states, A–F, which it would take three state variables to represent. However,
many of these states are equivalent and can be combined. Two states are
equivalent if they are indistinguishable from the inputs and outputs of the
circuit.

--- Page 784 ---
We define equivalence recursively. Two states are 0-equivalent if they
have the same output for all input combinations. Here, states A, B, and F are
0-equivalent, as are states C, D, and E. Two states are k-equivalent if they
have the same output for all input combinations and their next states for each
input combination are (k − 1)-equivalent. Here we see that the next states for
A, B, and F aren’t just equivalent, they are the same, so A, B, and F are also
1-equivalent. Similarly for C, D, and E.
In practice, we find equivalent states by forming sets of states that are 0-
equivalent (e.g., {A, B, F} and {C, D, E}), then sets of states that are 1-
equivalent, and so on until the sets don’t change. That is, when we find a set
of states that is both k-equivalent and (k + 1)-equivalent we’re done – these
sets are equivalent.
In this case, states A, B, and F are equivalent and C, D, and E are
equivalent. Rewriting the flow table with just two states A and C (one for
each equivalence class) gives us the reduced flow table of Figure 27.11(c).
If we use the output as the state variable, assigning state A an encoding of
0 and state C an encoding of 1, we can rewrite the reduced flow table of
Figure 27.11(c) as the Karnaugh map of Figure 27.12(a). There are three
implicants shown on the Karnaugh map. While we can cover the function
with just two implicants (qgd = X11 ∨  10X), we need the third, 1X1, to
avoid a hazard (see Section 6.10). If the output were to dip low momentarily
when the enable g input falls (going from qgd = 111 to 101), the end state
could be 001 – with the latch losing the stored 1. The added implicant (1X1)
avoids this hazard. A schematic for the latch circuit is shown in Figure
27.12(b).

--- Page 785 ---
Figure 27.12. Logic design of a latch: (a) Karnaugh map; (b) schematic. The 1X1 implicant is needed
in order to prevent a hazard.
27.5 FLOW-TABLE SYNTHESIS OF A D FLIP-
FLOP
Figure 27.13 shows the derivation of a flow table for a D-type flip-flop. We
start by showing a waveform that visits all eight states shown in the flow
table. As with the latch, we construct the flow table by toggling each input
(clk and d) in each state. We create a new state for each input combination
unless it is obviously equivalent to a state that we have already visited. The
resulting flow table has eight states and is shown in Figure 27.13(b).

--- Page 786 ---
Figure 27.13. Flow-table synthesis of an edge-triggered D flip-flop: (a) waveforms; (b) flow table; (c)
reduced flow table.
The next step is to find state equivalence classes. We start by observing
that the 0-equivalent sets are {A, B, C, D} and {E, F, G, H}. For 1-
equivalence, we observe that the next state of D with an input of 11 is in a
different class than that of the rest of its set. Similarly for H with an input of
10. Thus, the 1-equivalent sets become {A, B, C}, {D}, {E, F, G}, break and
{H}.

--- Page 787 ---
A reduced flow table with just these four states is shown in Figure
27.13(c). Our output q will be one of our state variables. We assign a second
state variable as shown in the “Code” column of the table. Here q is the
MSB of the two-bit state code, and our new variable is the LSB.
Figure 27.14 shows how the flow table of Figure 27.13(c) is reduced to
logic. We start by redrawing the flow table as a Karnaugh map with
symbolic entries in Figure 27.14(a). Variable q is the output, and variable x is
our additional state variable. The next step is to replace the symbolic next
states with their state codes qx, as shown in Figure 27.14(b). We next write
down the Karnaugh maps for the two state variables in Figure 27.14(c) – q is
on the left, x is on the right.

--- Page 788 ---
Figure 27.14. Deriving the logic design of a D flip-flop from the flow table of Figure 27.13(c). (a)
Flow table drawn on a Karnaugh map. (b) Karnaugh map showing next-state function. (c) Karnaugh
maps for each bit of next-state function. (d) Logic diagram derived from Karnaugh maps.

--- Page 789 ---
The two next-state variable functions can each be covered with two
implicants. As with the latch, we must add a third to each to avoid a hazard.
For variable q, we have implicants qxcd = X11X, 1X0X, and, to eliminate
the hazard, 11XX. For x we have implicants X11X, XX01, and, for the
hazard, X1X1. Drawing out these implicants as the logic diagram of Figure
27.14(d), we see that we have synthesized the master–slave D flip-flop using
Earle latches of Figure 27.7. The astute reader will notice that the top AND
gate of the master latch and the bottom AND gate of the slave latch have
identical inputs and can be replaced by a single shared AND gate.
Summary
In this chapter you have looked inside a flip-flop to understand better its
behavior and timing constraints. We first derived a latch circuit, the Earle
latch, and, using this circuit we derived the setup, hold, and delay times of a
latch, in terms of internal gate delays within the latch.
Combining two latches forms a master–slave flip-flop. The master latch,
enabled by clock low, follows the input while the clock is low and samples
the input on the rising edge of the clock. The slave latch, enabled by clock
high, holds the output steady while the clock is low. Analyzing this circuit,
we derived the setup, hold, and delay times for a flip-flop.
In CMOS logic, latches and flip-flops are often implemented using
transmission gates. Their behavior and analysis, however, are identical to
those of the Earle latch.
Finally, we performed flow-table analysis of both the latch and the flip-
flop. This analysis gives more insight into the behavior of the flip-flop and
provides a good example of flow-table analysis.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
The Earle latch was developed at IBM in the mid 1960s. It was disclosed in
1965 [38] and granted a patent in 1967 [39]. For a more thorough survey of
flip-flops, consult a circuit text [112] or comparison-based research papers
such as refs. [28] and [67].
Exercises

--- Page 790 ---
27.1Latch timing properties, I. Compute ts for the latch of Figure 27.4 in
terms of the delays of the individual gates. Assume that the delay of
gate Ui is ti.
27.2Latch timing properties, II. Compute th for the latch of Figure 27.4 in
terms of the delays of the individual gates. Assume that the delay of
gate Ui is ti.
27.3Latch timing properties, III. Compute tdDQ for the latch of Figure
27.4 in terms of the delays of the individual gates. Assume that the
delay of gate Ui is ti.
27.4Latch timing properties, IV. Compute tdGQ for the latch of Figure
27.4 in terms of the delays of the individual gates. Assume that the
delay of gate Ui is ti.
27.5Flip-flop timing properties, I. Compute ts for the D flip-flop of
Figure 27.8 in terms of the delays of the individual gates. Assume
that the delay of gate Ui is ti.
27.6Flip-flop timing properties, II. Compute th for the D flip-flop of
Figure 27.8 in terms of the delays of the individual gates. Assume
that the delay of gate Ui is ti.
27.7Flip-flop timing properties, III. Compute tdCQ for the D flip-flop of
Figure 27.8 in terms of the delays of the individual gates. Assume
that the delay of gate Ui is ti.
27.8CMOS flip-flop timing properties, I. Compute ts for the D flip-flop of
Figure 27.10 in terms of the delays of the individual gates (and
transmission gates). Assume that the delay of gate Ui is ti and that the
delay of each transmission gate is tg.
27.9CMOS flip-flop timing properties, II. Compute th for the D flip-flop
of Figure 27.10 in terms of the delays of the individual gates (and
transmission gates). Assume that the delay of gate Ui is ti and that the
delay of each transmission gate is tg.
27.10CMOS flip-flop timing properties, III. Compute tdCQ for the D flip-
flop of Figure 27.10 in terms of the delays of the individual gates
(and transmission gates). Assume that the delay of gate Ui is ti and
that the delay of each transmission gate is tg.

--- Page 791 ---
27.11 Flip-flop contamination delay, I. Consider a flip-flop constructed by
placing a delay line with delay td between the master and slave
latches. When the flip-flop input d changes exactly ts before the clock
rises, signal m at the input of the delay line becomes valid exactly at
the clock edge, and signal m1 at the output of the delay line and input
to the slave latch becomes valid td after the rising edge of the clock.
What is the contamination delay tcCQ and propagation delay tdCQ of
this modified flip-flop?
27.12Flip-flop contamination delay, II. What is the maximum legal value
of td for the flip-flop of Exercise 27.11?
27.13Pulsed-latch flip-flop, I. Another D flip-flop design is shown in
Figure 27.15. This flip-flop consists of a single latch that is gated by a
pulse generator. When clk rises, a narrow pulse is generated on enable
g to sample d. The latch then holds the sampled value until the next
rising edge of the clock. Answer the following questions about the
circuit of Figure 27.15(c). Assume that the delay of gate Ui is ti.
(a) What is the minimum pulse width generated by U2 for which
this circuit will work properly?
(b) What is the maximum pulse width generated by U2 (if any) for
which this circuit will work properly?

--- Page 792 ---
Figure 27.15. Pulsed-latch D-type flip-flop: (a) schematic using latch symbol; (b) schematic showing
internals using a CMOS latch; (c) schematic showing internals using an Earle latch. When clk rises,
NAND gate U2 generates a narrow low-going pulse on g that enables the latch to sample d.
27.14Pulsed-latch flip-flop, II. Assuming that the pulse width out of U2 is
the value you computed in Exercise 27.13(a), compute ts, th, and tdCQ
for this pulsed-latch flip-flop and compare these values with the
timing parameters of the master–slave flip-flop analyzed in the text.
In particular, compare the overhead, ts + tdCQ, of the two flip-flops.
27.15CMOS pulsed-latch flip-flop, I. Repeat Exercise 27.13 for the CMOS
pulsed latch of Figure 27.15(b).
27.16CMOS pulsed-latch flip-flop, II. Repeat Exercise 27.14 for the
CMOS pulsed latch of Figure 27.15(b).
27.17The 7474 flip-flop, I. Figure 27.16 shows the schematic of another
type of D flip-flop: the 7474. Like other D flip-flops, it has a clock
(c) and data (d) inputs. The circuit itself can be broken into an RS
latch (rightmost two NAND gates) and a four-state asynchronous
circuit (leftmost four NAND gates). Draw the flow diagram for this
four-state asynchronous circuit, circling the stable states. Explain how
this circuit operates. Include the state transitions, showing that the
output can change only on the rising clock edge.

--- Page 793 ---
Figure 27.16. The flip-flop design of the 7474, used in Exercises 27.17 and 27.18. It consists of a
four-state asynchronous circuit feeding an RS latch with inverted inputs.
27.18The 7474 flip-flop, II. What is the setup and hold time of the 7474 D
flip-flop of Figure 27.16? Assume that the delay of each NAND gate
is a constant t.
27.19Combining logic and storage. This question explores building a latch
that takes in two inputs (a and b) and stores the AND of their values.
(a) Using the Earle latch of Figure 27.3, derive the timings of a
system that places a two-input AND gate before input d. Assume
that the delay of gate Ui is ti.
(b) Modify the Earle latch by adding another input to both U3 and
U4, such that the AND is performed inside the feedback loop.
What are the new timings with respect to g?
(c) What are the setup and hold times of a with respect to b?
1 A black box is a system for which we understand the external specifications, but not the internal
implementation – as if the system were inside an opaque (black) box that keeps us from seeing how
it works.
2 This assumes that the setup time is large enough that signal m is stable ts1 before the clock rises. See
Exercise 27.11 for an example where this is not the case.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 794 ---
28
Metastability and synchronization failure
What happens when we violate the setup- and hold-time constraints of a
flip-flop? Until now, we have considered only the normal behavior of a
flip-flop when these constraints are satisfied. In this chapter we
investigate the abnormal behavior that occurs when we violate these
constraints. We will see that violating setup and hold times may result in
the flip-flop entering a metastable state in which its state variable is
neither a 1 nor a 0. It may stay in this metastable state for an indefinite
amount of time before arriving at one of the two stable states (0 or 1). This
synchronization failure can lead to serious problems in digital systems.
To stretch an analogy, flip-flops are a lot like people. If you treat them
well, they will behave well. If you mistreat them, they behave poorly. In
the case of flip-flops, you treat them well by observing their setup and
hold constraints. As long as they are well treated, flip-flops will function
properly, never missing a bit. If, however, you mistreat your flip-flop by
violating the setup and hold constraints, it may react by misbehaving –
staying indefinitely in a metastable state. This chapter explores what
happens when these good flip-flops go bad.
28.1 SYNCHRONIZATION FAILURE
When we violate the setup- or hold-time constraints of a D flip-flop, we can
put the internal state of the flip-flop into an illegal state. That is, the internal
nodes of the flip-flop can be left at a voltage that is neither a 0 nor a 1. If the
output of the flip-flop is sampled while it is in this state, the result is
indeterminate and possibly inconsistent. Some gates may see the flip-flop

--- Page 795 ---
output as a 0, while others may see it as a 1, and still others may propagate
the indeterminate state.
Consider the following experiment with a D flip-flop. Initially both d and
clk are low. During our experiment, they both rise. If signal d rises ts before
clk, the output q will be 1 at the end of the experiment. If signal clk rises th
before d, the output q will be 0 at the end of the experiment. Now consider
what happens as we sweep the rise time of d relative to clk from ts before clk
to th after clock. Somewhere during this interval, the output q at the end of
our experiment changes from 1 to 0.
To see what happens when we change the input during this forbidden
interval, consider the master latch of a CMOS D flip-flop, as shown in
Figure 28.1(a). Here we assume that the supply voltage is 1 V, so a logic 1 is
1 V and a logic 0 is 0 V. Figure 28.1(b) shows the initial-state voltage of the
flip-flop (the voltage across the inverter ΔV = V1 − V2 the instant after the
clock has risen) as a function of data transition time. If d rises at least ts
before clk, the node labeled V1 is fully charged to 1 V and the node labeled
V2 is fully discharged to 0 V before the clock falls. Thus the state voltage ΔV
= V1 − V2 is 1 V. As d changes later, the state voltage is reduced as shown in
Figure 28.1(b). At first, V1 is still fully charged, but V2 doesn’t have time to
discharge fully. As d rises still later, V1 doesn’t have time to charge fully.
Finally, when d rises th after the clock, V1 doesn’t have time to charge at all,
and we have V1 = 0 and V2 = 1 so ΔV = −1.
Figure 28.1. Abnormal operation of the master latch of a flip-flop. (a) Schematic of the latch. (b) State
voltage vs. data transition time. As the data transition time sweeps from ts before the clock to th after

--- Page 796 ---
the clock, the state voltage – i.e., the voltage across the storage inverters (ΔV = V1 − V2) – changes
from +1to−1.
The initial-state voltage ΔV is a continuous function of the data transition
time as it sweeps from −ts to th. It may not be an exact linear function as
shown in the figure, but it is continuous, and it does cross zero at some point
during this interval. Over this entire interval, the flip-flop has an initial state
voltage that is not +1 or −1, hence its output is not a fully restored digital
signal and may be misinterpreted by following stages of logic.1
28.2 METASTABILITY
The good news about synchronization failure is that most of the illegal states
that flip-flops can be left in after violating timing constraints decay quickly
to a legal 0 or 1 state. Unfortunately, it is possible for the circuit to be left in
an illegal metastable state where it may remain for an arbitrary amount of
time before decaying to a legal state.
After the clock has risen, the latch of Figure 28.1(a) becomes a
regenerative feedback loop (Figure 28.2(a)). The input transmission gate of
the latch is off and the feedback tri-state inverter is enabled so that the
equivalent circuit is that of two back-to-back inverters.
Figure 28.2. (a) The input latch of a flip-flop with the clock high acts as two back-to-back inverters.
(b) DC transfer characteristics of the back-to-back inverters. The solid curve shows V2 = f(V1) and the

--- Page 797 ---
dashed curve shows V1 = f(V2). The system has two stable points and one metastable point.
The DC transfer curve of these back-to-back inverters is shown in Figure
28.2(b). This figure shows the transfer curve of the forward inverter, V2, as a
function of V1 (V2 = f(V1), solid line), and the transfer curve of the feedback
tri-state inverter, V1, as a function of V2 (V1 = f(V2), dashed line). There are
three points on the figure where the two lines cross. These points are stable
in the sense that, in the absence of perturbations, the voltages V1 and V2 do
not change. Since V1 = f(V2) = f( f(V1)), the circuit can sit at any of these
three points indefinitely.
At any point other than these three stable points, the circuit quickly
converges to one of the outer two stable points. For example, suppose that V2
is just slightly below the center point, as shown in Figure 28.3. This drives
V1 to a point found by going horizontally from this point to the dashed line.
This in turn drives V2 to a point found by going vertically to the solid line,
and so on. The circuit quickly converges to V1 = 1, V2 = 0.
Figure 28.3. The dynamics of the back-to-back inverter circuit can be approximated by repeatedly
applying the DC transfer characteristics of the two inverters, as shown by the gray line on this figure.
This iteration of the DC transfer curves is an oversimplification, but it gets
the main point across. The circuit is stable at any of the three stable points.
However, if we perturb the state slightly from either of the two end-points,
the state returns to that end-point. If we disturb the state slightly from the
midpoint, the state will quickly converge to the nearest end-point. A state,

--- Page 798 ---
like the central stable state, where a small perturbation causes a system to
leave that state, is called metastable.
There are many physical examples of metastable states. Consider a ball at
the top of a curved hill, as shown in Figure 28.4. This ball is in a stable state.
That is, it will stay in this state since, if it’s exactly centered, there is no
force acting to pull it left or right. However, if we give the ball a slight push
left or right (a perturbation), it will leave this state and wind up in one of the
two stable states at the bottom of the hill. In these states, a small push will
result in the ball returning to the same state.
Figure 28.4. A ball at the top of a hill is in a metastable state. At rest, there is no force acting to push
the ball left or right. However, a slight perturbation to the left or right will cause the ball to leave this
state and fall to the left or right stable states at the bottom of the hill.
The ball on the hill is exactly analogous to a flip-flop. The flip-flop in the
metastable state (center point of Figure 28.2) is exactly like the ball on top of
the hill. All it takes is one little push (or not being exactly centered to begin
with) and the circuit rolls downhill to one of the two stable states.
The dynamics of the back-to-back inverter circuit are, in fact, governed by
the following differential equation:
(28.1)
where τs is the time constant of the back-to-back inverters. In simple terms,
the rate of change of the flip-flop state ΔV is directly proportional to its
magnitude. The further it is from zero, the faster it moves away – until it is
limited by the power supply.
The solution of this differential equation is given by

--- Page 799 ---
(28.2)
This solution is plotted in Figure 28.5 for several initial values of ΔV. With
the exponential regeneration of the back-to-back inverters, the magnitude of
ΔV increases e-fold each τs. Thus, if the circuit starts with ΔV(0) = e−1, it
takes time τs for the circuit to converge to ΔV(t) = 1. Similarly, if the circuit
starts at ΔV(0) = e−2, it takes 2τs to converge, and so on. Generalizing, we
see that the amount of time that it takes to converge to ΔV = +1 or −1 is
given by
ts = −τs log(ΔV(0)). (28.3)
Figure 28.5. Plot of ΔV(t) for different values of ΔV(0). The magnitude of ΔV increases by e each time
constant.
EXAMPLE 28.1 Time to converge
What is the time taken to converge to ΔV = 1whenΔV(0) = 0.25? By plugging the values into Equation
(28.3), we find ts:
ts = −τs log(0.25) = 1.4τs.
EXAMPLE 28.2 Minimum initial voltage

--- Page 800 ---
What is the smallest value of ΔV(0) that converges in less than 10τs?
To solve this problem, we rearrange Equation (28.2) to solve for ΔV(0):
28.3 PROBABILITY OF ENTERING AND
LEAVING AN ILLEGAL STATE
If we sample an asynchronous signal (one that can change at any instant),
with a clock (Figure 28.6), what is the probability that our flip-flop will enter
a metastable state? Suppose our clock period is tcy, and that our flip-flop has
setup time ts and hold time th. Each transition of the asynchronous signal is
equally likely to occur at any point during the cycle. Thus, there is a
probability of
(28.4)
Figure 28.6. Sampling an asynchronous signal with a clock. If a transition of the asynchronous signal
happens during the ts + th interval around the clock edge, our flip-flop may enter an illegal state.
that a given transition will violate the setup or hold time of the flip-flop and
hence cause it to enter an illegal state.
If the asynchronous signal has transitions with frequency fa s−1,thenPE of
the asynchronous edges will fall during the forbidden setup and hold region

--- Page 801 ---
of the cycle. Thus, the frequency of errors (violating setup or hold time) is
given by
fE = faPE = fafcy(ts + th). (28.5)
For example, suppose we have a flip-flop with ts = th = 100 ps and our
cycle time is tcy = 2 ns. Then the probability of error is
(28.6)
Now consider the case where the asynchronous signal has a transition
frequency of 1MHz. Then the frequency of errors is given by
fE = faPE = 1MHz(0.1) = 100 kHz. (28.7)
We see that, for realistic numbers, sampling an asynchronous signal can
lead to an unacceptably high error rate.
As we shall see in Chapter 29, a partial solution to the problem of
frequently entering illegal states is to hide the condition for a period of time,
tw, to allow the illegal state to decay to one of the two stable states. We can
calculate the probability of a flip-flop still being in an illegal state after
waiting time tw by considering the probability of certain initial states and the
time required for them to decay.
Given that a flip-flop enters an illegal state, it lands at a particular state
voltage ΔV with some probability. We can (conservatively) estimate this
probability distribution to be uniform over the interval (−1, 1). Then, from
Equation (28.3), the probability of taking longer than tw to exit an illegal
state is the same as the probability that
(28.8)

--- Page 802 ---
With |ΔV(0)| uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, the probability of taking
longer than tw to reach a stable state is simply:
(28.9)
For example, suppose we have a flip-flop with τs = 100 ps and we wait tw
= 2ns = 20τs for an illegal state to decay. To still be in an illegal state after
20τs, the flip-flop must have started with |ΔV(0)| smaller than exp(−20). With
|ΔV(0)| uniformly distributed over [0, 1), the probability of this is PS =
exp(−20).
28.4 DEMONSTRATION OF METASTABILITY
To many students, metastability is just an abstract concept until they see it
for themselves. At that point, something clicks and they realize that
metastability is real and it can happen to their flip-flops. This is best done
via a laboratory exercise or a classroom demonstration. Ideally, you will
have a chance to experience a live demonstration of metastability. If not,
then this section will at least show pictures of what it really looks like.
Figure 28.7 shows a schematic of our metastability demonstration circuit.
The circuit consists of six 4000-series CMOS integrated circuits, five
resistors, and three capacitors. The small numbers next to the gate and
transistor terminals are the pin numbers of the integrated circuits. You can
easily build your own copy of our metastability demonstration circuit from
this schematic and repeat the demonstration for yourself.

--- Page 803 ---
Figure 28.7. Schematic of our metastability demonstration circuit. The circuit consists of an oscillator,
voltage-controlled delay lines, and two RS flip-flops. Feedback acts to push the flip-flop under test
into the metastable state.
A photograph of our implementation of the demonstration circuit is shown
in Figure 28.8. U1, U2, and U3 are along the bottom of the board from left to
right, and U4, U5, and U6 are along the top of the board. The double-pole,
double-throw switch that selects between the two RS flip-flops is out of the
image to the right.

--- Page 804 ---
Figure 28.8. Metastability demonstration circuit implemented on a prototyping board.
The circuit has three main sections: an oscillator, a pair of voltage-
controlled delay lines, and two RS flip-flops. At the far left, one gate of IC
U1 –aCD4093 quad Schmitt-trigger NAND gate – is wired as a relaxation
oscillator. The 1 kΩ resistor and 3.3 nF capacitor set the time constant of the
oscillator at 3.3 μs, giving a period of about 6 μs. Integrated circuits U3 and
U2 are wired as voltage-controlled delay lines. The circuit is an inverter with
its supply starved by a PFET, whose gate is connected to a control voltage
VC. The higher VC, the lower the current flowing through the PFET and the
larger the delay of a rising edge on the output of the inverter. Extra gates of
U1 and U4 are used to buffer the output of the delay lines – to give sharp
rise and fall times into the RS flip-flops being tested. Finally, the right side
of the schematic shows two RS flip-flops. The top flip-flop is constructed

--- Page 805 ---
from two gates of U4 – a CD4011 quad NAND gate. The bottom flip-flop is
constructed from individual transistors of U5 and U6 – a CD4007.
Feedback from the output of the flip-flops controls the delay lines to drive
the flip-flops into a metastable state. A switch selects one of the two flip-
flops under test to control the voltage-variable delay line via an RC filter.
The Q output of the selected flip-flop is connected to the control voltage of
the lower delay line – which drives the NAND gate driving the QN output.
Similarly, the QN output of the selected flip-flop drives the upper delay line,
which drives the NAND gate connected to Q.
This feedback connection drives the flip-flop into a metastable state.
When the inputs to the flip-flop go high, the faster input will win and cause
its output to go low. This, in turn, lowers the control voltage of the delay line
driving the other input – speeding it up and causing the slow input to catch
up with the fast input. Once the flip-flop is in the metastable state, its two
outputs Q and QN will go low equally often – holding the circuit in
equilibrium.
Figure 28.9 shows the RS flip-flop entering and leaving a metastable state.
This figure is a screen capture from an oscilloscope in infinite-persistance
mode. In this mode the scope leaves the old waveforms on the screen as it
writes new ones – accumulating all waveforms over a period of time. The
horizontal scale is 200 ns per division and the vertical scale for both signals
is 2 V per division. The scope was recording for 1s when this screen was
captured. With the oscillator running at about 400 kHz, this recording is the
superposition of about 400 000 traces.

--- Page 806 ---
Figure 28.9. Input and output of the lower RS flip-flop in Figure 28.7. Waveforms accumulated for
one second.
The top trace shows one input to the RS flip flop and the bottom trace
shows one output. The output enters a metastable state, a voltage midway
between GND and VDD about 250 ns after the input has fallen. It leaves the
metastable state to become either a 1 or a 0 with an exponential decay, like
that sketched in Figure 28.5. In most cases, the metastable state decays in
about 250 ns. However, on a few occasions it takes about 400 ns for the
metastable state to decay. This reflects the fact that, with decreasing
probability, the initial state can be arbitrarily close to the center of the
metastable region – and hence can take arbitrarily long to decay. In this
figure, the output decays to a high state slightly more often than it decays to
a low state. This is due to an offset in the circuit, causing the initial
probability distribution to be off center.
Figure 28.10 shows a screen capture of the oscilloscope after 1 h – an
accumulation of more than one billion traces. On a few of these billion, the
flip-flop has landed very close to the center of the metastable region, as
indicated by the few traces that have taken up to 800 ns to decay to a stable
state. The left side of the waveform has filled in – indicating a large number
of trials that decay in 250 ns to 600 ns, with the recording becoming

--- Page 807 ---
progressively sparser from 600 ns to 800 ns, reflecting the exponential drop
in probability with time.
Figure 28.10. Input and output of the lower RS flip-flop in Figure 28.7. Waveforms accumulated for
one hour.
With just one billion trials, we have metastable states lasting up to 800 ns.
A modern high-end GPU chip has millions of flip-flops2 running at more
than 1 GHz. A large supercomputer may have 20 000 such chips. In such a
machine, over 1016 flip-flop clock events happen per second, and over 1020
flip-flop clock events occur per year. Synchronization and metastable states
must be handled carefully, because even very unlikely events can be a
problem when multiplied by such a high frequency.
When the other RS flip-flop, constructed from two gates of a CD4011
quad NAND gate, is selected, the waveform in Figure 28.11 results. We
leave the explanation of this waveform as Exercise 28.13.

--- Page 808 ---
Figure 28.11. Input and output of the upper RS flip-flop in Figure 28.7, using CD4011 quad NAND
gate integrated circuit, with this flip-flop selected.
Summary
In this chapter you have developed an understanding of metastability and the
failures that can occur when flip-flops sample asynchronous signals. We
modeled a flip-flop as a regenerative circuit with positive feedback and saw
how this model has two stable states and one metastable state. The two
stable states correspond to the two normal states of the flip-flop. In these
normal states, one storage node of the flip-flop is high and the other is low.
In the metastable state, both internal nodes of the flip-flop are at an
intermediate voltage – neither high nor low. Like a stable state, the
metastable state can persist indefinitely. Unlike a stable state, a small
perturbation from the metastable state will cause it to diverge to one of the
two stable states. Like a ball perched on top of a hill, a flip-flop in a
metastable state can stay in that position forever. However, if the ball, or the
flip-flop, is displaced slightly to one side or the other, it will fall down the
hill, or into a stable state.

--- Page 809 ---
We developed formulae to estimate the rate at which flip-flops used to
sample asynchronous signals enter and leave the metastable state. The
probability of entering the metastable state on an asynchronous event is just
the probability that the event occurs during the setup and hold window of the
flip-flop:
Once a flip-flop is in a metastable state, any small deviation from the
metastable state grows exponentially, growing by a factor of e every τs. The
probability that the flip-flop is still in the metastable state after waiting time
tw is given by
Finally, we saw a demonstration of metastability with oscilloscope
waveforms showing a flip-flop entering and leaving the metastable state.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
One of the earliest papers on the problems caused by metastability is ref.
[27]. A more detailed treatment of this problem is given in ref. [33].
Exercises
28.1Time to settle, I. What is the time to settle when the initial voltage
difference is 16 mV?
28.2Time to settle, II. What is the time to settle when the initial voltage
difference is 0.16 μV?
28.3Maximum voltage difference, I. What is the maximum initial voltage
difference for a metastable system to settle to ΔV = 1 V within 7τs?
28.4Maximum voltage difference, II. What is the maximum initial voltage
difference for a metastable system to settle to ΔV = 1Vin3.5τs?
28.5Time to settle vs. transition time. Assume a flip-flop with ts = th = 500
ps and τs = 100 ps. Plot a graph of data transition time vs. time to

--- Page 810 ---
settle on the y-axis for the flip-flop. Assume that the initial ΔV of the
system is linear between 1 V and −1 V from −500 ps to 500 ps (as
shown in Figure 28.1(b)). The time to settle should reflect the total
time to get to |ΔV| =1.
28.6Probability of error, I. What is the probability of an asynchronous
signal transitioning and violating setup and hold constraints of a flip-
flop where ts = th = 100 ps and fcy = 2 GHz?
28.7Probability of error, II. What is the probability of an asynchronous
signal transitioning and violating setup and hold constraints of a flip-
flop where ts = th = 20 ps and fcy = 4 GHz?
28.8Probability of error, III. What is the probability of an asynchronous
signal transitioning and violating setup and hold constraints of a flip-
flop where ts = th = 300 ps and fcy = 1MHz?
28.9Frequency of error, I. With a target of having only one illegal
asynchronous transition every 0.01 s, compute the maximum fa in a
system where ts = th = 100 ps and fcy = 2 GHz.
28.10Frequency of error, II. With a target of having only one illegal
asynchronous transition every 0.01 s, compute the maximum fa in a
system where ts = th = 20 ps and fcy = 4 GHz.
28.11 Frequency of error, III. With a target of having only one illegal
asynchronous transition every 0.01 s, compute the maximum fa in a
system where ts = th = 300 ps and fcy = 1MHz.
28.12Probability of staying in an illegal state. You are designing a circuit
and are given two different flip-flop options. Flip-flop 1 has ts = th =
50 ps and τs = 20 ps while flip-flop 2hasts = th = 250 ps and τs = 10
ps. Explain which flip-flop you use to minimize errors in each of the
following scenarios:
(a) tw = 0 ps;
(b) tw = 50 ps.
Plot the error probability as a function of tw for both flip-flop 1 and
flip-flop 2. Assume fc = 1 GHz and fa = 10MHz.
28.13Oscillatory metastability. Explain the waveform of Figure 28.11.
(Hint: look at a schematic showing the internal circuit of the CD4011
NAND gate.)

--- Page 811 ---
28.14False synchronizer. An engineer in your company has suggested
building a fast synchronizer by using a flip-flop, followed by a
comparator, followed by a second flip-flop. The comparator has a
threshold set at 0.2 V, low enough that a metastable output of the flip-
flop is sensed as a logic 1. Does this reliably synchronize one-bit
signals? Explain your answer, and give the probability of
synchronization failure, if it is non-zero, in terms of circuit
parameters.
1 Technically, any output voltage above VIH and below VIL will not be misinterpreted. For the rest of
the chapter, however, we classify initial-state voltages between −1 and +1 as illegal.
2 However, only a small fraction of these flip-flops must deal with asynchronous signals.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 812 ---
29
Synchronizer design
In a synchronous system, we can avoid putting our flip-flops in illegal or
metastable states by always obeying the setup- and hold-time constraints.
When sampling asynchronous signals or crossing between different clock
domains, however, we cannot guarantee that these constraints will be
met. In these cases, we design a synchronizer that, through a combination
of waiting for metastable states to decay and isolation, reduces the
probability of synchronization failure.
A brute-force synchronizer consisting of two back-to-back flip-flops is
commonly used to synchronize single-bit signals. The first flip-flop
samples the asynchronous signal and the second flip-flop isolates the
possibly bad output of the first flip-flop until any illegal states are likely
to have decayed. Such a brute-force synchronizer cannot be used on
multi-bit signals unless they are encoded with a Gray code. If multiple
bits are in transition when sampled by the synchronizer, they are
independently resolved, possibly resulting in incorrect codes, with some
bits sampled before the transition and some after the transition. We can
safely synchronize multi-bit signals with a FIFO (first-in first-out)
synchronizer. A FIFO serves both to synchronize the signals and to
provide flow control, ensuring that each datum produced by a transmitter
in one clock domain is sampled exactly once by a receiver in another
clock domain – even when the clocks have different frequencies.
29.1 WHERE ARE SYNCHRONIZERS USED?

--- Page 813 ---
Synchronizers are used in two distinct applications, as shown in Figure
29.1. First, when signals are coming from a truly asynchronous source, they
must be synchronized before being input to a synchronous digital system.
For example, a push-button switch pressed by a human produces an
asynchronous signal. This signal can transition at any time, and so must be
synchronized before it can be input to a synchronous circuit. Numerous
physical detectors also generate truly asynchronous inputs. Photodetectors,
temperature sensors, pressure sensors, etc. all produce outputs with
transitions that are gated by physical processes, not a clock.
The other use of synchronizers is to move a synchronous signal from one
clock domain to another. A clock domain is simply a set of signals that are
all synchronous with respect to a single clock. For example, in a computer
system it is not unusual to have the processor operate from one clock, pclk,
and the memory system operate from a different clock, mclk. These two
clocks may have very different frequencies. For example, that of pclk may
be 2 GHz while that of mclk is 800MHz. Signals that are synchronous to
pclk – i.e., in the pclk clock domain – cannot be directly used in the
memory system. They must first be synchronized with mclk. Similarly,
signals in the memory system must first be synchronized with pclk before
they can be used in the processor.
Figure 29.1. Synchronizers are needed between asynchronous and synchronous systems (left). They
are also needed between clock domains both on- and off-chip.
In moving signals between clock domains, there are two distinct
synchronization tasks. If we wish to move a sequence of data where each
datum in the sequence must be preserved, we use a sequence synchronizer.
For example, to send eight words in sequence (one word at a time over a
data bus) from the processor to the memory system, we need a sequence
synchronizer. On the other hand, if we wish to monitor the state of a signal
we need a state synchronizer. Astate synchronizer outputs a recent sample

--- Page 814 ---
of the signal in question synchronized to its output clock domain. To allow
the processor to monitor the depth of a queue in the memory system, we use
a state synchronizer – we do not need every sample of queue depth (one
each clock), just one recent sample. On the other hand, we cannot use a
state synchronizer to pass data between the two subsystems; it may drop
some elements and repeat others.
29.2 BRUTE-FORCE SYNCHRONIZER
Synchronization of single-bit signals is often achieved using a brute-force
synchronizer, as shown in Figure 29.2. Flip-flop FF1 samples an
asynchronous signal a, producing output aw. Signal aw is unsafe because of
the high frequency with which FF1 will enter an illegal state. To guard the
rest of the system from this unsafe signal, we wait one (or more) clock
periods for any illegal states of FF1 to decay before resampling it with FF2,
to produce output as.
How well does the synchronizer of Figure 29.2 work? In other words,
what is the probability of as being in an illegal state after a transition on a?
This will happen only if (1) FF1 enters an illegal state and (2) this state has
not decayed before aw is resampled by FF2. FF1 enters an illegal state with
probability PE (see Equation (28.4)), and it will remain in this state after a
waiting time tw with probability PS (see Equation (28.9)). Thus, the
probability of FF2 entering an illegal state is given by
(29.1)


--- Page 815 ---
Figure 29.2. A brute-force synchronizer consists of two back-to-back flip-flops. The first flip-flop
samples asynchronous signal a, producing signal aw. The second flip-flop waits one (or more) clock
cycles for any metastable states of the first flip-flop to decay before resampling aw,to produce
synchronized output as.
The waiting time tw here is not a full clock cycle, but rather a clock cycle
less the required overhead:
tw = tcy − ts − tdCQ. (29.2)
For example, if we have ts = th = tdCQ = τs = 100 ps and tcy = 2 ns, then
the probability of FF2 entering an illegal state is given by
If signal a has a transition frequency of 100 MHz, then the frequency of
failure is given by
fES = faPES = (100MHz)(1.5 × 10−9) = 0.15 Hz. (29.3)
If this synchronizer failure probability is not low enough, we can make it
lower by waiting longer. This is best accomplished by adding clock enables
to the two flip-flops and enabling them once every N clock cycles. This
lengthens the wait time to
tw = Ntcy − ts − tdCQ. (29.4)
In our example above, waiting two clock cycles reduces our failure
probability and frequency to

--- Page 816 ---
PES = 0.1 exp(−38) = 3.1 × 10−17, (29.5)
fES = (100MHz)(3.1 × 10−17) = 3.1 × 10−9 Hz. (29.6)
Using a clock enable to wait longer is more efficient than using multiple
flip-flops in series because with the clock enables we pay the flip-flop
overhead ts + tdCQ just once, rather than once per flip-flop. Each clock cycle
after the first adds a full tcy to our waiting time. With flip-flops in series,
each additional flip-flop adds tcy − ts − tdCQ to our waiting time.
How low a failure probability is low enough? This depends on your
system and what it is used for. Generally we want to make the probability of
synchronization failure significantly smaller than that of some other system
failure mode. For example, in a telecommunication system where the bit-
error rate of a line is 10−20, it would suffice to make a synchronizer with a
failure probability PES of 10−30. For some systems used for life-critical
functions, the mean time to failure (MTTF = 1/fES) must be made long
compared with the lifetime of the system times the number of systems
produced. So, if the system is expected to last 10 years (3.1 × 108 s), and we
build 105 systems, we would like to make our MTTF much larger than 3.1 ×
1013 (i.e., fES should be much less than 3 × 10−14). Here we might set a goal
of fES = 10−20 (fewer than one failure every 1011 years – per system).
EXAMPLE 29.1 Brute-force synchronizer
Calculate the mean time to failure for a system with fa = 1kHz,fcy = 1 GHz, ts = th = 50 ps, τs = 100
ps, and tdCQ = 80 ps that uses three back-to-back flip-flops for a synchronizer.
The probability of entering the metastable state is given by Equation (28.4):
Our three back-to-back flip-flops wait two clock cycles less flip-flop insertion overhead:

--- Page 817 ---
Thus, the probability of failure on each event is given by
Thus our failure frequency is given by
fES = faPES = (105)(2.78 × 10−9) = 2.78 × 10−4 Hz.
The MTBF is therefore
MTBF = 1/ff = 3.60 × 103 s.
29.3 THE PROBLEM WITH MULTI-BIT
SIGNALS
While a brute-force synchronizer does a wonderful job synchronizing a
single-bit signal, it cannot be used to synchronize a multi-bit signal unless
that signal is Gray-coded (i.e., unless only one bit of the signal changes at a
time). Consider, for example, the situation shown in Figure 29.3. The
output, cnt, of a four-bit counter clocked by one clock, clk1, is synchronized
with a second clock, clk2, operating at a different frequency. Suppose on the
count from 7 (0111) to 8 (1000) all of the bits of cnt are changing when clk2
rises – violating setup and hold times on register R1. The four flip-flops of
R1 all enter illegal states. During the next cycle of clk2 these states all
decay to 0 or 1 with high probability, so that when clk2 rises again, a legal
four-bit digital signal is sampled and output on cnts.

--- Page 818 ---
Figure 29.3. Incorrect method of synchronizing a multi-bit signal. Counter clocked by clk1 is
sampled by synchronizer clocked by clk2. On a transition where multiple bits of signal, cnt, change,
the synchronized output, cnts, may see some of the bits change, but not others, giving an incorrect
result.
Figure 29.4. VHDL description of a four-bit Gray-code counter.
The problem is that, with high probability, the output on cnts is wrong.
For each of the changing bits of cnt, the synchronizer can settle to either a 0

--- Page 819 ---
or a 1 state. In this case, when all four bits are changing, the output of the
synchronizer could be any number between 0 and 15.
The only time a brute-force synchronizer can be used with multi-bit
signals is when these signals are guaranteed to change at most one bit
between synchronizer clock transitions. For example, if we wish to
synchronize a counter in this manner, we must use a Gray-code counter,
which changes by exactly one bit on each count. A four-bit Gray-code
counter uses the sequence 0, 1, 3, 2, 6, 7, 5, 4, 12, 13, 15, 14, 10, 11, 9, 8.
Only one bit changes between adjacent elements of this sequence. For
example, the eighth transition is from 4 (0100) to 12 (1100). Only the MSB
changes during this transition. If we replace the counter of Figure 29.3 with
a four-bit Gray-code counter, and the 4 to 12 transition takes place during a
rising edge of clk2, then only the MSB of R1 will enter an illegal state. The
low three bits will remain steady at 100. Either way the MSB settles, 0 or 1,
the output is a legitimate value, 4 or 12.
VHDL code for a four-bit Gray-code counter that generates this sequence
is shown in Figure 29.4.
29.4 FIFO SYNCHRONIZER
If we can’t use a brute-force synchronizer on arbitrary multi-bit signals and
our signal is not amenable to Gray coding, then how can we move it from
one clock domain to another? There are several synchronizers that
accomplish this task. The key concept behind all of them is removing
synchronization from the multi-bit datapath. The synchronization is moved
to a control path that is either a single bit or a Gray-coded signal.

--- Page 820 ---
Figure 29.5. Datapath of a FIFO synchronizer. Input data are placed in registers R0, ..., RN by the
input clock clkin. Output data are selected from among the registers by an output clock clkout. A
control path, not shown, ensures that (1) data are placed in a register before being selected for output
and (2) that data are not overwritten before being read.
Figure 29.6. Timing diagram showing operation of a FIFO synchronizer with four registers.
Perhaps the most common multi-bit synchronizer is the FIFO
synchronizer. The datapath of a FIFO synchronizer is shown in Figure 29.5.

--- Page 821 ---
The FIFO synchronizer works by using a set of registersR0toRN. Data are
stored into the registers under control of the input clock and read from the
registers under control of the output clock. A tail pointer selects which
register is to be written next, and a head pointer selects which register is to
be read next. Data are added at the tail of the queue, and removed from the
head of the queue. The head and tail pointers are Gray-coded counters that
are decoded to one-hot to drive the register enables and multiplexer select
lines. Using Gray-code encoding for the counters enables them to be
synchronized using brute-force synchronizers in the control path.
A timing diagram showing operation of a FIFO synchronizer with four
registers (R0 to R3) is shown in Figure 29.6. The input clock, clkin, in this
example is faster than the output clock, clkout. On each rising edge of the
input clock, a new datum on line in is written to one of the registers. The
register written is selected by the tail pointer, which increments with a
Gray-code pattern (0, 1, 3, 2, 0,...). The first datuma is written to register
R0, the second datum b is written to R1, c is written to R3, and so on. With
four registers, the output of each register is valid for four input clocks.
On the output side, each rising edge of clock clkout advances the head
pointer, selecting each register in turn. The first rising edge of clkout sets
head to 0, selecting the contents of register R0 a to be driven onto the
output. The four-input-clock valid period of R0 more than overlaps the one-
output-clock period during which it is selected, so no input-clock-driven
transitions are visible on the output. The only output transitions are derived
from (and hence synchronous with) clkout. The second rising edge of clkout
advances head to 1, selecting b fromR1toappear on the output, the third
edge selects c from R3, and so on.
By extending the valid period of the input data using multiple registers,
the FIFO synchronizer enables this data to be selected on the output without
having clkout sample any signal with transitions synchronized with clkin.
Thus, there is no probability of violating setup and hold times in this
datapath.
Of course, we have not eliminated the need to synchronize (and the
probability of synchronization failure), we have simply moved it to the
control path. You will observe that, with the input clock running faster than
the output clock, our FIFO synchronizer will quickly overflow unless we
apply some flow control. The input needs to be stopped from inserting any
more data into the FIFO when all four registers are full. Similarly, if clkout

--- Page 822 ---
were faster than the input clock, we would need to stop the output from
removing data from the FIFO when it is empty.
We add flow control to our FIFO in the control path. A full block diagram
of the FIFO including the control path is shown in Figure 29.7 (the registers
have been grouped together into a RAM array), and the control path by
itself is shown in Figure 29.8. In the control path we add two flow-control
signals to each of the two interfaces. Both on the input interface and on the
output interface, the valid signal is true if the transmitter has valid data on
the data line, and the ready signal is true if the receiver is ready to accept
new data. A data transfer takes place only if valid and ready are both true.
On the input side, ivalid is an input signal, and iready is asserted if the
FIFO is not full. On the output side, oready is an input signal, and ovalid is
asserted if the FIFO is not empty.
Figure 29.7. FIFO synchronizer showing control path.

--- Page 823 ---
Figure 29.8. Control path of FIFO synchronizer showing clock domains.
The iready (not full) and ovalid (not empty) signals are generated by
comparing the head and tail pointers. This comparison is complicated by the
fact that head and tail are in different clock domains. Signal head is
synchronous with clkout, whereas tail is synchronous with clkin. We solve
this problem by using a pair of multi-bit brute-force synchronizers to
produce a version of head in the input clock domain, headi, and a version of
tail in the output clock domain, tailo. This synchronization is allowed only
because head and tail are Gray-coded and thus will have only one bit in
transition at any given point in time. Also, note that the synchronization
delays the signals, so that headi and tailo areuptotwoclockcyclesbehindhead
and tail.
Once we have versions of head and tail in the same clock domain, we
compare them to determine the full and empty conditions. When the FIFO
is empty, head and tail are the same, so we can write
empty <= ’1’ when (head = tail_o) else ’0’;
ovalid <= not empty ;
When the FIFO is full, head and tail are also the same. Thus, if we were to
allow all registers to be used, we would need to add additional state to
discriminate between these two conditions. Rather than add this complexity,
we simply declare the FIFO to be full when it has just one location empty,
and write

--- Page 824 ---
full <= ’1’ when (head_i = inc_tail) else ’0’;
iready <= not full;
where inc_tail is the result of incrementing the tail pointer along the
Gray-code sequence. This approach always leaves one register empty. For
example, with four registers, only three would be allowed to contain valid
data at any time. Despite this disadvantage, this approach is usually
preferred because of the high complexity of maintaining and synchronizing
the extra state needed to discriminate between full and empty when head
== tail. Weleavetothe reader, as Exercise 29.10, the design of a FIFO
where all locations can be filled.
FIFO states are illustrated in Figure 29.9. Part (a) shows the state of the
head and tail pointers when the FIFO is empty. In parts (b) and (c) data are
added to the FIFO, incrementing the tail. In Figure 29.9(d), the FIFO has
only one location open, and (in our implementation) will assert full and not
accept new data. In part (e) the FIFO is completely full, with head = tail.
The head and tail pointers both equal zero in Figures 29.9(a) and (e); the
former represents an empty FIFO and the latter shows a full one. Additional
state must be maintained to distinguish these two conditions.

--- Page 825 ---
Figure 29.9. FIFO states. (a) FIFO is empty, head = tail. (b) After inserting one datum. (c) After
inserting two data. (d) Almost full, head = inc(tail). (e) Completely full, head = tail.
The VHDL code for the FIFO synchronizer is shown in Figure 29.10.
The width and depth of the FIFO are parameterized – defaulting to eight
bits wide with eight registers. A synchronous RAM module, not shown,
contains the eight registers. A register clocked by clkout holds head and
one clocked by clkin holds tail. A pair of brute-force synchronizers create
signals head_i and tail_o. A pair of three-bit Gray-code incrementers
(VHDL code in Figure 29.11) increments head and tail – along the Gray-
code sequence – producing inc_head and inc_tail. Note that if this code
were to be used for a FIFO deeper than eight registers, wider Gray-code
incrementers would be required – GrayInc3 is not parameterized. Next in
the code, flow-control signals iready and ovalid are computed as
described above. Finally, the next states for head and tail are computed.
The head and tail are incremented only if both the valid signal and the
ready signal for their respective interfaces are true.

--- Page 826 ---
Operation of the FIFO synchronizer is shown in the waveforms of Figure
29.12. On the input side, after reset, iready becomes true, signaling that the
FIFO is not full and hence able to accept data. Two cycles later, ivalid is
asserted and seven data elements are inserted into the FIFO. At this point,
the FIFO is full and iready goes low. On each data word inserted, tail is
incremented in a three-bit Gray-code sequence. Note that o_tail is delayed
by two output clocks from tail. Later, as words are removed from the
FIFO on the output side, iready goes high again and additional words are
inserted. Signal ivalid goes low for three cycles after 09 has been inserted.
During this period, data are not input, even though iready is true.

--- Page 828 ---
Figure 29.10. VHDL description of a FIFO synchronizer.
Figure 29.11. VHDL description of a three-bit Gray-code incrementer.
Just before the end of the simulation, the input (which is running on a faster
clock) gets seven words ahead of the output and iready goes low.
On the output side, ovalid does not go high, signaling that the FIFO is
not empty, until two output cycles after the first datum has been inserted on
the input side. This is due to the synchronizer delay of signal tail_o, from
which ovalid is derived. In the simulation we wait until the FIFO is full
and then remove five words, one every other cycle. Note that, from
removing the first word (01), it takes two input cycles for iready to go
high. This is due to the synchronizer delay of signal head_i, from which
iready is derived. After removing word 05, iready remains high for the
remainder of the simulation and one word per cycle is removed.
EXAMPLE 29.2 FIFO depth
Consider a FIFO synchronizer that uses brute-force synchronizers composed of two back-to-back
flip-flops to synchronize the head and tail pointers. Assuming the input and output clocks are running
at approximately the same frequency (±10%), what is the minimum FIFO depth that will support data
transport at full rate?
The FIFO must be deep enough that the input side does not see the FIFO as full before the head
pointer is synchronized back into the input domain when the clocks are at a worst-case relative phase.
Thus, the FIFO depth must be 5 – deep enough to cover a round-trip delay through (a) the tail
synchronizer to the output domain (two cycles), (b) one cycle for the output logic to react to the
ovalid signal and increment head_o, and (c) the head synchronizer back to the input domain (two
cycles). The delay of the synchronizers is two cycles each – one for each flip-flop in the
synchronizer. This assumes that the input and output clocks are nearly aligned – which is worst-case
timing. With the best-case relative phase, the total synchronizer delay will be three cycles rather than
four.

--- Page 829 ---
The total delay, and hence the required FIFO depth, can be seen in the timing table (Table 29.1),
which assumes that the clocks are nearly aligned. The FIFO is originally empty – with both pointers
at 0. In cycle 0, ivalid is asserted, inserting a word into the FIFO and causing tail_i to increment
to 1 in cycle 1. Two cycles later, in cycle 3, tail_o increments to 1, causing ovalid to be asserted –
showing the output that the FIFO is not empty. The output removes a word in cycle 3, causing
head_o to increment to 1 in cycle 4. After the synchronizer delay, head_i increments in cycle 6.

--- Page 831 ---
Figure 29.12. Waveforms from simulating the FIFO synchronizer of Figure 29.10.
Table 29.1. Timing table for the FIFO of Example 29.2 showing the time taken to insert and
remove values from the FIFO
Cycle tail_i tail_o head_o head_i T−H Comment
0 0 0 0 0 0 Initial state
1 1 0 0 0 1 Firstelementinserted
2 2 0 0 0 2
3 3 1 0 0 3 Outputnotempty
4 4 2 1 0 4
5 5 3 2 0 5
6 6 4 3 1 5 Increment of head reaches input
The sixth column of Table 29.1, T–H, shows tail_i − head_i, the number of words the input
thinks are in the FIFO. Even though only three words are in the FIFO in the steady state, because of
synchronizer delay the input sees the peak occupancy as five words and the output sees the
occupancy tail_o = head_o as one word. Unless the depth of the FIFO is at least 5, the input will
see a full condition and stall before the synchronized head pointer reflects that the output has
removed the first word.
Summary
In this chapter you have seen how to synchronize asynchronous events
safely and pass signals between clock domains. While it is impossible to
reduce the probability of synchronization failure to zero,1 it can be made
arbitrarily small by designing an appropriate synchronizer. Synchronizers
are typically used on asynchronous inputs of digital systems and on the
boundaries of clock domains.
A brute-force synchronizer synchronizes a single-bit signal by sampling,
waiting, and resampling. A sampling flip-flop samples an asynchronous
signal, entering a metastable state with probability PE on each transition.
We wait an appropriate amount of time tw to allow any metastable states to
decay and then resample the output of the first flip-flop with a second flip-
flop. By choosing the waiting interval large enough, we can make the
probability of synchronization failure PF = PEPS arbitrarily small.
A brute-force synchronizer cannot be used on multi-bit signals where
many bits change simultaneously because it samples each bit independently.

--- Page 832 ---
Thus, its output may include some bits from the old word and other bits
from the new word. Brute-force synchronizers can be used on multi-bit
signals only when they are Gray-coded so that only one bit changes at a
time.
Arbitrary multi-bit signals can be synchronized with a FIFO
synchronizer. Words are inserted into the FIFO in the input clock domain
and removed from the FIFO in the output clock domain. Synchronization is
required only to pass the head and tail pointers between the two domains to
check for empty and full conditions. This can be safely accomplished by
Gray coding the head and tail pointers and synchronizing them with brute-
force synchronizers.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC NOTES
There are many more types of synchronizers than we have had time to
discuss here. See ref. [33] for a survey. Even though the synchronization
problem is decades old, new work is constantly being carried out on the
topic [31].
Exercises
29.1Brute-force synchronizer, I. Calculate the mean time to failure of a
system with fa = 200 MHz, fcy = 2 GHz, waiting one cycle for
synchronization. Use the flip-flop parameters of Table 29.2.
Table 29.2. Flip-flop parameters to use throughout the exercises
ts 50 ps
th 20 ps
τs 40 ps
tdCQ 20 ps
29.2Brute-force synchronizer, II. Calculate the mean time to failure of a
system with fa = 200MHz, fcy = 2 GHz, waiting five cycles for
synchronization. Use the flip-flop parameters of Table 29.2.

--- Page 833 ---
29.3Brute-force synchronizer, III. Calculate the mean time to failure of a
system with fa = 200 MHz, fcy = 2 GHz, using five back-to-back
flip-flops for synchronization. Use the flip-flop parameters of Table
29.2.
29.4Brute-force synchronizer, IV. For a system with fa = 200 MHz, fcy =
2 GHz, plot the mean time to failure on a semi-log axis as a function
of the number of cycles spent synchronizing.
29.5Brute-force synchronizer, V. You are designing a pacemaker that
takes an asynchronous signal that pulses up to 200 times per minute.
You synchronize using a flip-flop with the parameters given in Table
29.2 and a 1 GHz clock.2 There are to be over 107 pacemakers in the
field, with a lifetime of 30 years. How many cycles must your
synchronizers wait in order to have a mean time to failure greater
than that of the combined lifetime of all the pacemakers?
29.6Once-and-only-once synchronizer. Design a once-and-only-once
synchronizer. This circuit accepts an asynchronous input a and a
clock clk and outputs a signal that goes high for exactly one clock
cycle in response to each rising edge on the input a.
29.7Multi-bit synchronization, I. When using a two-bit brute-force
synchronizer to transfer a two-bit Gray-coded signal across clock
domains, what is the minimum amount of time that needs to elapse
between bit toggles? That is, what is the maximum clock rate at
which the Gray codes can advance?
29.8Multi-bit synchronization, II. Tired of constantly encoding your data
to have only one bit transition at a time, you decide to build a
different system to send data from one clock domain to another. You
will send eight bits (with different propagation delays, or data skew,
tds) and one valid signal from the input clock domain (cycle time
ta)to a brute-force synchronizer into the output clock domain (cycle
time tb). The module connected to the output will sample the data
bits on the first rising output clock where the synchronized valid is
high. Draw a waveform, labeling all relevant timing constraints, of
sending eight-bit values in this manner. Make sure to allow enough
time for the data to synchronize into the output domain before
asserting the valid signal.

--- Page 834 ---
29.9Thermometer-coded synchronization. Design a module that can be
used to synchronize an eight-bit thermometer-coded signal (Figure
1.7(c)). The input should be the two clocks, increment and
decrement signals in the input clock domain. The outputs should be
the eight-bit signal. Make sure you do not use any state from the
output domain with logic on the input domain.
29.10FIFO synchronizer. Modify the logic of the FIFO synchronizer to
allow the last location to be filled. You will need to add state to
encode whether the FIFO is full or empty when head = tail.
29.11 Full/empty bits. Design and code a FIFO synchronizer that uses a
presence bit for each register instead of head and tail pointers. When
the input writes a value into a register, the corresponding presence
bit is marked as full. When the output reads a value, the
corresponding presence bit is marked empty. You will need a bank of
presence bits in each clock domain. Assume that the RAM can be
safely read asynchronously, but is written synchronously in clock
domain 1. You should have room for four entries in the shared RAM.
29.12FIFO depth, I. Consider a FIFO synchronizer that uses brute-force
synchronizers composed of three back-to-back flip-flops to
synchronize the head and tail pointers. Assuming the input and
output clocks are running at approximately the same frequency
(±10%), what is the minimum FIFO depth that will support data
transport at full rate?
29.13FIFO depth, II. Consider a FIFO synchronizer that uses brute-force
synchronizers composed of four back-to-back flip-flops to
synchronize the head and tail pointers. Assuming the input and
output clocks are running at approximately the same frequency
(±10%), what is the minimum FIFO depth that will support data
transport at full rate?
29.14Clock stopper, I. Consider a pipeline of modules each running on
their own clock. An alternative to using FIFO synchronizers between
the stages is to stop the clock of each stage to ensure that transfers at
the input and output are safe from synchronization failure. Design a
clock stopper module, an asynchronous circuit that, together with a
delay line, generates the clock for one such pipeline stage. Your
module should have inputs ivalid from the preceding pipeline stage,
oready from the next pipeline stage, delayo from the delay line, and

--- Page 835 ---
done from the logic of this pipeline stage. It should produce outputs
iready to the preceding pipeline stage, ovalid to the next pipeline
stage, and delayi to the delay line. You may assume that the delay of
the delay line is more than half of the minimum cycle time of this
pipeline stage.
Because there is no common clock to reference for the ready and
valid signals, your module should obey four-phase flow control. In
phase 1, a module signals that it has a valid datum on its output by
asserting its valid signal, which must remain high until phase 2, when
the receiving module accepts the datum by asserting its ready signal.
The ready signal must remain high until phase 3, when the
transmitting module lowers its valid signal. Finally, valid must remain
low until phase 4, when the transmitting module lowers its ready
signal.3
29.15Clock stopper, II. Repeat Exercise 29.14 with two-phase flow
control between modules. With two-phase flow control, a
transmitting module signals that it has a new datum ready on its
output by toggling its valid signal, and a receiving module accepts
the datum by toggling its ready signal. Because signaling is done on
both rising and falling edges of the signals, there is no need to wait
for the signals to return to zero.
29.16Putting it all together. Go design and implement a digital system
that is useful, profitable, interesting, and/or really cool.
1 Unless the synchronization is avoided entirely.
2 Real pacemakers run nowhere near this clock rate; we are using this value for the sake of example.
3 Because the meaning of these flow-control signals is slightly different in the asynchronous context,
they are often called request and acknowledge (or req and ack for those with repetitive stress
injuries) in asynchronous systems. To avoid confusion, we will stick with the valid and ready
convention here.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 836 ---
Part VIII
Appendix: VHDL coding style and syntax guide
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 837 ---
APPENDIX A
VHDL coding style
In this appendix we present a few guidelines for VHDL coding style.
These guidelines grew out of experience with both VHDL and Verilog
description languages. These guidelines developed over many years of
teaching students digital design and managing design projects in industry,
where the guidelines have been proven to reduce effort, to produce better
final designs, and to produce designs that are more readable and
maintainable. The many examples of VHDL throughout this book serve as
examples of this style. The style presented here is intended for
synthesizable designs – VHDL design entities that ultimately map to real
hardware. A very different style is used in testbenches. This section is not
intended to be a reference manual for VHDL. The following appendix
provides a brief summary of the VHDL syntax used in this book and many
other references are available online. Rather, this section gives a set of
principles and style rules that help designers write correct, maintainable
code. A reference manual explains what legal VHDL code is. This
appendix explains what good VHDL code is. We give examples of good
code and bad code, all of which are legal.
A.1 BASIC PRINCIPLES
We start with a few basic principles on which our VHDL style is based. The
style presented is essentially a VHDL-2008 equivalent to a set of Verilog
style guidelines based upon our experience over many years of teaching
students digital design and managing design projects in industry combined
with nearly a decade of experience teaching earlier versions of VHDL.

--- Page 838 ---
Know where your state is Every bit of state in your design should be
explicitly declared. In our style, all state is in explicit flip-flop or
register components, and all other portions are purely combinational.
This approach avoids a host of problems that arise when writing
sequential statements directly within an “if rising\_edge(clk)
then” statement inside a process. It also makes it much easier to detect
inferred latches that occur when not all signals are assigned in all
branches of a conditional statement.
Understand what your design entities will synthesize to When you write a
design entity, you should have a good idea what logic will be generated.
If your design entity is described structurally, wiring together other
components, the outcome is very predictable. Small behavioral design
entities and arithmetic blocks are also very predictable. Large
behavioral design entities, where the outcome of the synthesis can’t be
predicted, should be avoided.
Make your code readable Over the course of a project, a design entity may
need to be revised. Whether this is easy or nearly impossible has a lot to
do with the readability of the design entity. The functionality should be
clear – e.g., use a case or case? statement for a truth table. Use
descriptive signal and constant names. Include comments that capture
the intent of the code – don’t just duplicate what the code says with a
comment. When you go to edit a design entity that has been well
written, you will find it easy to understand the functionality of the
design and make changes. If the design entity uses odd coding and
cryptic names, you will have difficulty understanding it and you will
become frustrated, particularly when you realize that you wrote it in the
distant past.
Be defensive Think about what could go wrong with your design entity.
What are the edge cases for inputs and outputs? Make sure each of
these can be handled. Include assertions for invariants that must be
maintained and for error conditions that can be checked.
Let the synthesizer do its job Modern logic synthesis tools (such as
Synopsys Design Compiler®, Altera Quartus II®, and Xilinx Vivado®)
do a great job of optimizing small combinational design entities (up to
about ten inputs). They also do a great job of optimizing arithmetic
circuitry. Except under very rare circumstances, there is no point in

--- Page 839 ---
manually optimizing such designs. The design entity description should
be written in a straightforward behavioral manner, enabling the tools to
do what they are good at.
Understand what the synthesizer can’t do Modern synthesis tools are not
good at making high-level optimizations. They don’t understand how to
factor or partition logic or when a function unit can be shared. They
can’t make a tradeoff about when a function should be executed in one
cycle or when it should be pipelined over several cycles. This is where
the human designer adds value. Don’t expect the tools to do the
designer’s job – and vice versa.
A.2 ALL STATE SHOULD BE IN EXPLICITLY
DECLARED REGISTERS
All state in your design should be in explicitly instantiated register or flip-
flop components. An example of correct style is shown in Figure A.1
(adapted from Figure 16.3). Here, a four-bit register is declared with input
nxt and output output. The next-state function is described with a single
assignment statement.
Avoid writing design entities like that shown in Figure A.2. This design
entity mixes the creation of state (an assignment within an if
rising_edge(clk) then statement) with the definition of the next-state
function.
We insist on this coding style because it helps designers, and particularly
students, follow our first two design principles. First, it helps the designer
know where the state is. When you explicitly declare registers – and regard
inferred latches as errors – you know where your state is. When coding in
the style of Figure A.2, it is very easy to create state without knowing it.
There is no strong distinction between a state variable and an intermediate
variable that is used in computing the next-state function.
This coding style also helps a designer understand what their VHDL will
synthesize to. It will generate the state register and the combinational logic
that produces the next-state function. When coding in the incorrect style that
mixes state and function (Figure A.2), it is very easy for designers, and
particularly students, to start writing VHDL with a style similar to C code

--- Page 840 ---
without understanding what is implemented in time and what is implemented
in space. The results are often disastrous.
When teaching VHDL, our style avoids confusion about what is the
current state and what is the next state. The statement
Figure A.1. Correct style for a counter design entity. The state of the counter is held in an explicitly
declared register, component count of type vDFF.

--- Page 841 ---
Figure A.2. Incorrect style for a sequential design entity. State is mixed with next-state computation in
a single process.
nxt <= (others=>’0’) when rst else output+1;
makes it clear that nxt is the next state and that we are computing this state
from the current state output. In contrast, the statement
if rst then
output <= (others => ’0’);
else
output <= output + 1;
end if;
confuses the issue by using the same signal output on both sides of an
assignment. The next state is hidden.
Our style also sidesteps a tremendous amount of confusion and frustration
that results from incorrect use of VHDL signals and variables within a

--- Page 842 ---
process. Moreover, the bad style has no clear advantages. It isn’t any shorter
or easier to read than the good style.
Don’t mix state and function in a single process block. There is no upside
to the style of Figure A.2, and considerable downside.
A.3 DEFINE COMBINATIONAL DESIGN
ENTITIES SO THAT THEY ARE EASY TO
READ
Now that we have banished all state to explicitly declared registers, we can
focus the remainder of this style guide on how to write good combinational
logic designs.
Modern logic synthesis tools are very good at optimizing small
combinational logic designs. Thus, these components should be written in
the manner that is easiest to read and understand. For logic that is naturally
described with a truth table, we code a design using a case or case?
statement inside a process. For logic that is naturally described with an
equation (datapath logic, Chapter 16) a concurrent assignment statement is
in order.
Figure A.3 (extracted from Figure 9.6) illustrates how to use a case
statement to implement a combinational function best described with a table,
in this case the days-in-month function. A case statement on the input
signal month assigns the appropriate values to the output signal days for each
value of input. The most common output case is handled in the when others
=> case. Input cases with the same output assignment are grouped together
for clarity and brevity.


--- Page 843 ---
Figure A.3. Implement combinational functions that are best described with a table using a case
statement.
Figure A.4. Combinational design whose function is best described by an equation should use a
concurrent signal assignment statement.
Figure A.5. A logic description where a case statement is used to decode a control signal (in this case
opcode) to select an equation to compute a data signal.
Figure A.6. Using a conditional case? statement to assign a value to the nxt signal on the basis of
four prioritized input signals.
A combinational function that is naturally described with an equation
should use a concurrent assignment statement (i.e., a statement that is NOT
in a process), as illustrated in Figure A.4. Here we compute the number of
1s1 in a four-bit signal x. This is very easily described and understood as an
equation. Describing this function as a case statement would be long and
confusing.
Often it is natural to describe a component as a truth table of equations. A
truth table of control signal values determines how the next states of data
signals are computed using equations. An example of this style is shown in
Figure A.5.

--- Page 844 ---
When a number of binary control signals with priority are decoded to
determine a function, a variant of this hybrid style using a case? statement
can be employed as shown in Figure A.6. This statement computes a next-
state variable nxt for a sequential circuit that can reset, shift left, shift right,
load, or hold the current value depending on a set of binary control signals.
A.4 ASSIGN ALL SIGNALS UNDER ALL
CONDITIONS
To avoid inferring latches – state that is not intended – it is imperative that
every variable that is assigned on any branch of a conditional statement be
assigned on all branches of that statement. See also Rule C2 in Section B.10.
Figure A.7. Bad code: a latch is inferred because nxt is not assigned when rst is false.
Figure A.8. Correct code: nxt is assigned on all branches.

--- Page 845 ---
Figure A.9. Bad code: not all signals are assigned in each case.
Figure A.7 shows an example of a common error. Signal next is assigned
when rst is true (’1’), but it is not assigned if rst is false (’0’). This is not
a combinational circuit. It is a latch. When rst is false, nxt holds its value.
Correct use of the if statement is shown in Figure A.8. Signal nxt is
assigned both when rst is true and when rst is false. At this point, it is
worth contrasting the use of an if statement with a case statement. For a
case or case? VHDL requires that all input combinations have a
corresponding when statement, which is why we typically include a default
condition (when others =>). The when others => case nicely catches all
branches of a case or case? that have not been handled explicitly. For this
reason, a case or case? is preferred to an if in situations when either could
be used.

--- Page 846 ---
Figure A.10. Good code: assigning to a record makes it hard to omit a signal assignment from a
branch. It also results in code that is more readable.
Another common error occurs when not all the signals are assigned on all
of the branches. An example of this error is shown in Figure A.9. Here signal
output is not assigned in the second case. A latch will be inferred and it will
retain its previous state. One way to avoid this problem is to make each case
a single assignment to a signal declared as a VHDL record containing one
field for all outputs being assigned, as shown in Figure A.10. This style of
coding makes it hard to forget to assign a signal on a particular branch – it
stands out if you do so. It also makes the code much more readable. It looks
just like a state table.
A.5 KEEP DESIGN ENTITIES SMALL

--- Page 847 ---
For readability and to make sure you know what your design entity will
synthesize to, behavioral design entities should be kept small – no more than
50 lines of text. This will fit on one screen of a text editor, making it possible
to see the whole design entity at once and understand its function. Also, 50
lines of text are sufficient to describe most combinational logic functions;
anything larger than this is typically several separate functions and should be
broken up. If you do have a single function that can’t be described in 50
lines of code, you should give serious thought as to whether it can be
factored to reduce its complexity.
A.6 LARGE DESIGN ENTITIES SHOULD BE
STRUCTURAL
Another way of stating the last guideline is that large design entities should
be structural – instantiations of other components connected by wires. There
is no doubt what a structural design entity synthesizes to. Also, while
modern logic synthesis tools do well on small combinational logic designs
and arithmetic circuits, they do poorly on large designs. These tools excel at
making small-scale optimizations, but don’t see the big picture and don’t
understand how to make large-scale optimizations – like sharing an adder in
Figure 16.6.
A.7 USE DESCRIPTIVE SIGNAL NAMES
Your code will be much more readable if your signal names describe their
functionality. Consider, for example, the statement
aligned_mantissa <= mantissa sll exponent_difference
;
The meaning of each signal and the function of the statement are easy to
understand just by reading the statement. In contrast, writing the same
statement as

--- Page 848 ---
i <= j sll k;
does not convey the meaning or intent of the statement.
Long names, however, cut both ways. While they are easily readable, they
can make code appear cluttered. Statements are easier to understand if they
fit on one (or a few) lines. Long names tend to make statements spill over
multiple lines, making them harder to read. With an appropriate signal
dictionary – and supporting comments – short or abbreviated names can be
very readable, as in the following:
a_m <= m sll e_d;
When in doubt as to whether full names or abbreviated names are more
readable, we find it useful to write the code both ways and pick the version
that is most readable.
A.8 USE SYMBOLIC NAMES FOR
SUBFIELDS OF SIGNALS
Often a long signal is broken into a number of subfields. For example, a 32-
bit instruction may be split into an eight-bit opcode, three five-bit register
specifiers, and a nine-bit constant. Code becomes much more readable when
symbolic names are used for these subfields. Consider the statement
case instruction(31 downto 24) is ...
This conveys little meaning, and there is a danger of getting the bit-field
specifier wrong – particularly if it changes. Writing the same statement as
case opcode is ...
is much more readable.
A.9 DEFINE CONSTANTS

--- Page 849 ---
Numbers should rarely appear in VHDL code, and any given number should
never appear multiple times. Readability and maintainability are improved
by defining a constant or parameter and using the symbolic name in place of
the number.
Figure A.11. Bad code: constants should be defined with symbolic names.
Figure A.12. Good code: symbolic names are used for constants. The numerical value of a constant
appearing multiple times is defined exactly once.
Consider the code fragment from an instruction decoder for a MIPS
processor shown in Figure A.11. Reading this code gives no clue as to its
function. Moreover, the opcode for a MIPS R-type instruction 6’h0 and the
alu operation code for + (3’h5) both appear twice. The code is much more
readable if constants are defined.
On replacing the numbers with symbolic constants, as in Figure A.12, the
function of the code becomes clear. Moreover, using a symbolic constant for
a value that is used repeatedly – like the opcode for an R-type instruction
RTYPE_OPC or the alu operation code for + ADD_OP – the actual number is
used exactly once, in the constant definition. This makes it easy to update
should it ever change. For example, if we were to redesign our ALU so that
the operation code for + changed from 5 to 7, only the define statement
would need to be changed. The change is propagated to all uses of the
constant.
Symbolic names can be bound to constant values either as constants
(using VHDL constant) or as generic constants (using a generic clause in
the entity declaration). Unless a symbolic name takes on different values in

--- Page 850 ---
different instantiations of a component, it should be defined as a constant.
Generic constants should be reserved for, well, generic constants, values that
may differ in different instantiations of a component. The bit width of a
register or a counter is a good example of a generic constant. A function
code for an ALU or an opcode for a processor is a good example of a
constant – it doesn’t change from component instance to component
instance. Constants should be defined with an architecture if they are used
only within the architecture body or in a package if they are used across
multiple design entities.
A.10COMMENTS SHOULD DESCRIBE
INTENTION AND GIVE RATIONALE,
NOT STATE THE OBVIOUS
Well-written code should have lots of high-quality comments. Good
comments give the big picture of what the code is doing, capture the
designer’s intent, and give a rationale for design choices. Unfortunately,
many designers confuse quantity with quality and write lots of comments
that don’t add any information.
Consider the following code fragment:
case aluop is
when ADD_OP => c <= a + b ; -- add a and b
...
end case;
Duh! Of course this statement adds a and b. This comment doesn’t add any
value. It just clutters the code and should be deleted.
Now consider the following comment, which should have been added to
Figure 16.7:
-- factor the adder/subtractor out of the case
statement
-- because the synthesizer won’t combine two adders

--- Page 851 ---
-- increments when down=0, decrements when down=1
outpm1 <= output + ((n-2 downto 0 => down) & ’1’);
While a bit verbose, this comment adds value. It gives the big-picture view
of the code – that this adder has been factored out of a case statement. It
gives the rationale – because the synthesizer would have generated two
adders if we didn’t do the factoring manually. It also explains some
functionality that isn’t completely obvious on looking at the code.
A.11NEVER FORGET YOU ARE DEFINING
HARDWARE
When we are writing VHDL code, it is very easy to fall into the trap of
thinking we are writing a computer program – in which one statement
happens at a time. After all, VHDL looks a lot like C code and they share
many constructs. It is particularly easy to fall into this trap when you switch
back and forth regularly between writing VHDL and writing C, Python, or
some other programming language.
This is a very dangerous trap. Unlike with a computer programming
language, such as C, where one statement happens at a time, in a VHDL
program all statements happen at once. When you write a VHDL program
you are defining hardware. All of this hardware operates in parallel. Every
concurrent assignment statement of every component happens at the same
time.
Never forget that it is hardware – and that everything happens at the same
time.
A.12READ AND BE A CRITIC OF VHDL CODE
One becomes a better writer of English by reading the works of others, being
critical of their style, and emulating styles that work. One can become a
better VHDL designer in the same way. Read VHDL code whenever you
can. Be critical of code – point out what is both good and bad in your own

--- Page 852 ---
code and in the code of others. Do this constructively – judge the code, not
the person. Borrow unashamedly things that work, that make code better,
more readable, or easier to maintain. When your own code is being
criticized, don’t be defensive. Be open to criticism, listen, and learn.
The better technology companies foster an engineering culture that
encourages designers to read and critique each other’s code. Many
companies formalize this via design reviews – where a team of top engineers
reviews a completed piece of code. Others use pair programming, where all
coding is done by pairs of people – with one programming and the other
critiquing. However it is done, what is important is that a culture is created
where designers review the code of others, offer helpful criticism, and are
open to criticism of their own code.
1 The number of 1s in a binary word is often referred to as the population count of the word. Some
computers have a POPCOUNT instruction that performs this function.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 853 ---
APPENDIX B
VHDL syntax guide
In this appendix we provide a summary of the VHDL syntax employed in
this book. Before using this appendix you should first have read the
introductions to VHDL in Section 1.5 and Section 3.6. In addition to this
appendix you may find the subject index at the end of this book helpful
when looking for information about specific VHDL syntax features.
Excellent references documenting the complete VHDL language can be
found elsewhere [3, 55]. However, due to the complexity of the VHDL
language such references tend to lack detailed discussion of hardware
design topics. An abridged summary of the key aspects of VHDL syntax,
such as that found in this appendix, can be very helpful when learning
hardware design.
This book uses VHDL syntax features from the most recent standard,
VHDL-2008, that enable greater designer productivity and are supported by
the FPGA CAD tools typically used in introductory courses on digital
design. Many CAD tools by default still assume an earlier version of VHDL
even though they have support for VHDL-2008. Hence, you should consult
your CAD tool’s documentation to learn how to enable support for VHDL-
2008 before trying the examples in this book.1
To keep descriptions brief yet precise Extended Backus-Naur Form
(EBNF) is employed in this appendix. Non-terminals are surrounded by
angle brackets (“<” and “>”) and definitions of non-terminals are denoted by
the symbol “::=”. A list of choices is separated by a pipe symbol (“|”) and
the interpretation is that only one of the items should appear. Zero or more
repetitions of a construct are indicated by surrounding the construct with
curly braces (“{” and “}”). An optional construct (i.e., zero or one instances)
is indicated by surrounding it with square brackets (“[” and “]”). The EBNF

--- Page 854 ---
descriptions in this appendix are simplified versions of those found in the
VHDL language standard [55]. The simplified EBNF descriptions here
correspond to the VHDL syntax subset commonly used for synthesis.
The use of hardware description languages (HDLs) for hardware design
differs from the use of programming languages for software development.
Software is implemented by converting a program written in a programming
language into computer instructions that then appear to execute one at a
time. In contrast, a hardware description is synthesized into logic gates
connected by wires. While different instructions from a software program
execute at varying times, the logic gates and wires corresponding to a
hardware description operate continuously.
This appendix focuses on VHDL syntax relevant to synthesizable design
descriptions. Such a VHDL description must be written using a syntax subset
that is synthesizable. The requirement to restrict language usage to a subset
of the complete syntax during hardware design differs from style concerns
encountered during software development. The necessity of such syntax
restrictions results from the general-purpose nature of HDL languages,
including VHDL, that have come to dominate hardware design, combined
with the difficulty of automatically generating an efficient hardware design
from an arbitrary algorithmic specification. Indeed, there are even formal
standards that specify the minimum language subset that should be
considered to be synthesizable [56]. The last part of this appendix (Section
B.10) provides simplified rules that you can use to ensure your VHDL is
synthesizable. If these rules are violated the hardware generated from your
VHDL during synthesis will very likely behave differently than your VHDL
does during simulation.
Below we describe the various features of VHDL syntax beginning with
basic elements (comments, identifiers, keywords), then moving on to types
before considering design entities which provide the basic framework for
describing logic circuits in VHDL. The remainder of this appendix considers
the various forms of statements found inside design entities.
B.1 COMMENTS, IDENTIFIERS, AND
KEYWORDS

--- Page 855 ---
In VHDL single-line comments are preceded by two dashes (--) and extend
to the end of the line. VHDL-2008 introduces syntax for multi-line
comments. A multi-line comment starts with / ∗ and extends until ∗ /.
Identifiers and keywords (reserved words) in VHDL are case-insensitive.
An identifier must begin with an alphabetical character and can include any
number of alphabetical characters, digits 0 through 9, and underscores.
Examples of valid identifiers are Mux3 and state_next.
VHDL-2008 defines 115 reserved words. This is a large number when
compared with contemporary programming languages such as C, which
defines around 30 keywords, Java, which defines around 50 keywords, and
C++, which defines around 70 keywords. The large number of keywords can
make learning VHDL intimidating. However, a designer can be fully
productive after learning a core subset of 58 keywords that are listed in Table
B.1. The keywords listed in Table B.1 are discussed throughout this
appendix. Under the heading VHDL keywords the subject index at the end of
this book also lists page references to each of these keywords where they are
discussed throughout the book.
B.2 TYPES
VHDL is a strongly typed language. This means the designer is required to
invest time specifying the semantics (meaning) of binary values while
coding by declaring the type of signals used in the design. The “reward” for
this additional effort is that the root cause of many design errors is identified
via error messages when a VHDL description is compiled. Below we
consider some basic types used throughout the book and discuss how to
declare new types.
Table B.1. VHDL-2008 keywords used in this book
all downto in of rol to
and else inout or ror type
architecture elsif is others select use
array end library out signal variable
begin entity loop package sla wait

--- Page 856 ---
buffer file map port sll when
case for mod process srl with
component function nand record subtype xor
configuration generic nor report then xnor
constant if not return
B.2.1 Std_logic
A type used in most VHDL designs is std_logic. A signal or variable of
type std_logic represents a single bit value. In an electronic circuit logic
values of 0 and 1 are represented using voltages (as noted in Chapter 1). In a
VHDL specification these values can be represented as a std_logic value of
’0’ or ’1’, respectively (the single quotes are required). When specifying a
digital circuit it can also be helpful to indicate that the designer does not care
whether a value is logic value ’0’ or ’1’. This can be indicated using the
std_logic value ’-’ (e.g., a hyphen). The std_logic type also includes two
values ’U’ and ’X’ that are helpful for catching design errors while
simulating a digital circuit specification during verification testing (Section
20.1). The value ’U’ stands for undefined and indicates that no value has
been assigned. The value ’X’ stands for unknown and is usually used to
indicate that a single wire is being driven simultaneously to both logic value
1 and logic value 0 – a situation which would cause a short circuit in a real
circuit. In some situations, such as distributed multiplexers and buses
connecting many components, it is desirable to employ tri-state buffers in a
digital circuit (tri-state circuits are discussed in Chapter 4). To help tri-state
circuits, std_logic defines the value ’Z’ which represents a high-impedance
state corresponding to a tri-state buffer that has its enable input set to logic
value 0.
B.2.2 Boolean
The result of comparison operations is the VHDL predefined type boolean
which is distinct from std_logic and has values true and false. VHDL-
2008 introduces support for automatically converting a std_logic to a
boolean value where a boolean is expected.

--- Page 857 ---
B.2.3 Integer
VHDL includes a predefined type integer which is distinct from
std_logic_vector (described below). The range of values of integer is
guaranteed to be at least −(231 − 1) to 231 − 1. Integers are typically used
only for specifying parameters such as the width of a multi-bit
std_logic_vector signal. They are not typically used to store values
computed by a circuit.
Integer literals are written in base-10 (decimal) using the digits 0–9. For
example, the value one hundred is written 100 (without quotes).
B.2.4 Std_logic_vector
While a software developer uses types that have predefined bit widths (e.g.,
eight-bit characters or 64-bit integers), a digital designer typically has to
specify the precise bit width that suits the needs of the design. To do this
they employ multi-bit bus signals (Chapter 8). VHDL represents multi-bit
values as an array of std_logic values using the type std_logic_vector.
To fully specify a std_logic_vector type it is necessary to include an index
range. The index range accomplishes two goals: first, it indicates how many
bits wide the std_logic_vector is, which helps check uses of
std_logic_vector for errors. Second, it associates with each bit a numeric
index value that can be used to read or write individual bits. A
std_logic_vector is fully specified by including the index range in
parentheses using the syntax std_logic_vector( <index_range> ) where,
using EBNF,
<index_range> ::= <numeric_constant> downto
<numeric_constant> | <numeric_constant> to
<numeric_constant>
For example, std_logic_vector(2 downto 0) is a three-bit
std_logic_vector with indices 2 through 0.
Multi-bit literals of type std_logic_vector are written as bit string
literals using the notation <size><base>"<value>", where <size> is the bit
width of the constant (in decimal); <base> specifies the base, where <base>
is b for binary, o for octal, d for decimal, and x for hexadecimal; and
<value> gives the value using digits of the corresponding base. Optionally,

--- Page 858 ---
the base specifiers b, o, and x can be prefaced with s to indicate that <value>
should be sign extended to <size> bits (sign extension is described in
Chapter 10). For example, 6d"13" is a six-bit constant with value 0011012,
5x"f" is a five-bit constant with value 011112, 4so"4" is a four-bit constant
with value 11002 (the leftmost 1 is due to sign extension), and 7sb"-" is a
seven-bit constant with each bit equal to “-” (“don’t care”). Versions of
VHDL prior to VHDL-2008 support neither <size> nor "d" for <base>. If
<size> is omitted, the width is inferred from the number of digits in
<value>. For example, x"00" is eight bits wide since a single hexadecimal
digit is four bits (hexadecimal is described in Section 10.1). If <size> and
<base> are both omitted then in addition the base is assumed to be binary.
For example, "0101" is a four-bit binary number having value of five.
B.2.5 Subtypes
Sometimes it is convenient to give an alternative name for fully specified
std_logic_vector type if it occurs in multiple places. A new type name can
be introduced for this purpose using the following syntax:
subtype <identifier> is <subtype_indication> ;
where
<subtype_indication> ::= <type_mark> [ (
<index_range> ) ]
and <type_mark> is the name of a type or subtype. For example,
subtype state_type is std_logic_vector( 2 downto 0 );
declares a new subtype called state_type that is a three-bit
std_logic_vector.
B.2.6 Enumeration
VHDL provides the capability of specifying enumeration types using the
syntax

--- Page 859 ---
type <identifier> is ( <enum_literal> {,
<enum_literal> } );
where <identifer> is a user-defined name for the type that conforms to the
rules for identifiers (described in Section B.1) and <enum_literal> is
typically a meaningful name given by the designer. For example,
type state_type is ( SA, SB, SC, SD );
declares a new type called state_type that can take on the values SA, SB, SC,
or SD. Some VHDL designers prefer to specify the names of states in a state
machine (Chapter 14) using such enumerated types. In this textbook we
employ VHDL constants (described in Section B.4) for this purpose. The
reason is that constants enable the use of explicitly instantiated state which
has advantages for reducing designer errors.2
B.2.7 Arrays and records
VHDL provides two forms of composite types: arrays and records. Array
declarations are helpful for defining memory structures (Sections 8.8 and
8.9). The syntax for declaring a new array type is
type <identifier> is array (<index_range>) of
<subtype_indication>;
For example,
type mem_type is array (0 to 255) of
std_logic_vector( 15 downto 0 );
declares a new type called mem_type that is an array with 256 entries, each of
which is a 16-bit value of type std_logic_vector. To refer to a single
element of an array, use parentheses using the syntax
<array_identifier>( <index> )
For example, if memory has type mem_type then memory(0) refers to the first
word of memory which has type std_logic_vector(15 downto 0). As
noted earlier, std_logic_vector is actually an array of std_logic. So, if

--- Page 860 ---
input is the identifier of a signal with subtype std_logic_vector(7 downto
0) then input(3) refers to the bit with index 3 and it has type std_logic.
A VHDL record is somewhat similar to a struct in C and can be used for
grouping related signals into a single bus connecting different hardware
components. Another use is to enable a single assignment statement for all
outputs of a combinational logic block described with a process (see Section
A.4). The syntax for declaring a new record type is
type <identifier> is record <element_declaration> {
<element_declaration> } end record;
where
<element_declaration> ::= <identifer> {, <identifer>
} : <sub_type> ;
For example,
type inst_type is
record
opcode : std_logic_vector(6 downto 0);
dst : std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);
src1 : std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);
src2 : std_logic_vector(2 downto 0);
end record;
declares a record type named inst_type containing four fields named
opcode, dst, src1, and src2.
The elements of a record are accessed using a period (.). Continuing the
example above, if inst is a signal with type inst_type, then one can access
the opcode element using inst.opcode.
B.2.8 Qualified expressions
The type of a VHDL expression may be ambiguous, in which case it can be
specified by using a qualified expression. The syntax for a qualified
expression is
<qualified_expression> ::= <type_mark>’(<expression>)

--- Page 861 ---
An example of using a qualified expression is illustrated in Figure 14.13.
B.3 LIBRARIES, PACKAGES, AND USING
MULTIPLE FILES
The types std_logic and std_logic_vector are not part of the VHDL
language but rather part of the std_logic_1164 package within the ieee
library defined as part of the VHDL language standard. As illustrated in
Figure B.4 later, to use std_logic in your designs you must add the lines
“library ieee;” and “use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;”. The first line
tells the VHDL compiler that we wish to use the ieee library. The second
line tells the VHDL compiler that we wish to use the std_logic_1164
package within the ieee library. You can define your own packages using
the syntax illustrated in Figure 7.23.
For larger designs it is desirable to split your VHDL into multiple files.
Each file should refer to declarations from the same file or an earlier file. To
ensure this, all VHDL compilers provide a means for specifying the
compilation order of multiple files.
B.4 DESIGN ENTITIES
A VHDL description of a hardware design is composed of a hierarchy of
VHDL design entities. A single design entity can be viewed as a blueprint or
specification for the interface and operation of an individual hardware block.
A summary of the syntax for a design entity is shown in Figure B.1. Each
design entity is composed of two parts: an entity declaration and an
architecture body.
The entity declaration begins with the keyword entity and it defines the
interface between the internals of the hardware design and the outside world
via a list of port declarations. The entity declaration may also provide a set
of parameters that can be used to specialize a design entity via a list of
generic constants. To do this an optional generic clause is declared within an

--- Page 862 ---
entity declaration using the keyword generic. It declares a list of generic
constants using the syntax
generic( <generic_constants> );
where
<generic_constants> ::= <generic_constant> { ;
<generic_constant> }
<generic_constant> ::= <identifier> : <sub_type> :=
<expression>
A common use for generic constants is to parameterize the bit width of
inputs and outputs to a design entity. A port clause declares the inputs and
outputs to the design entity and has the syntax
port( <port_declarations> );
where
<port_declarations> ::= <port_declaration> { ;
<port_declaration> } <port_declaration> ::=
<identifer> {, <identifier> } : <mode> <sub_type>
<mode> ::= in | out | buffer | inout
Figure B.1. A VHDL design entity consists of an entity declaration containing a list of input and
output signal port declarations followed by an architecture body composed of an architecture
declarative part containing various declarations and an architecture statement part containing a set of
concurrent statements. The logic of the design entity is implemented by the concurrent statements.

--- Page 863 ---
The mode of a port indicates whether it is an input (in), output (out), output
which can also be read (buffer), or bi-directional signal (inout).
The architecture body begins with the keyword architecture and it is
divided into an architecture declarative part and an architecture statement
part. The declarative part contains declarations used inside the architecture
body and the statement part contains concurrent statements that implement
the logic of the hardware. The two portions are separated by the keyword
begin.
The architecture declarative part may contain type, constant, component,
and internal signal declarations. Type declarations follow the syntax from
Section B.2. Constants can be declared to help ensure that code is readable
and maintainable using the following syntax:
constant <identifier> : <sub_type> :=
<const_expression>;
where the value of the constant is defined by the expression after the :=
operator. Examples of the syntax for defining a constant can be found in
Figures 7.23 and 14.14. A component declaration is used to enable one
design entity to be used within an architecture body of another using
component instantiation (Section B.6.2). The syntax for a component
declaration is similar to that of an entity declaration:
component <component_name> is
[ generic( <generic_constants> ); ]
port( <port_declarations> );
end component;
Adding a component declaration matching an existing entity declaration
enables you to use that design entity in the architecture statement part. The
concurrent statements within the architecture statement part communicate
with each other through signals. A signal can be thought of as a set of wires
carrying logical values from one piece of hardware to another. The syntax
for declaring a signal is
signal <identifier> : <sub_type>;
The architecture statement part of the architecture body follows the
keyword begin and is composed of a set of concurrent statements. Each
concurrent statement operates in parallel with the others. This parallel

--- Page 864 ---
operation is fundamental to hardware description languages and has no
corresponding syntax in common programming languages such as C and
C++. We elaborate more on the syntax of concurrent statements in Section
B.6. A simple example of a design entity is shown in Figure 1.11.
B.5 SLICES, CONCATENATION,
AGGREGATES, OPERATORS, AND
EXPRESSIONS
In digital designs it is often necessary to operate upon individual bits of a
multi-bit value. While we can operate on an individual bit using array index
notation, it is sometimes more helpful to access a range of bits of a multi-bit
value using slice notation:
<slice> ::= <array_identifier>( <index_range> )
For example, input(7 downto 4) refers to only the first four bits of input.
One can concatenate array elements and slices to create a larger array
value out of individual elements and smaller array values. The concatenation
operator in VHDL is the ampersand, &. For example,
’1’ & ’0’ & ’1’ & ’0’
is equivalent to "1010". Another example is
input(3 downto 0) & input(7 downto 4)
which results in the eight-bit value formed by swapping the rightmost and
leftmost four-bits of input. One can also concatenate elements with slices.
For example,
’1’ & "01" & ’0’
is also equivalent to "1010".
Similarly to concatenation, VHDL provides a means for forming arrays
out of array elements that is known as an aggregate. The syntax for an
aggregate is

--- Page 865 ---
<aggregate> ::= ( <element> {, <element> } ) | (
<index_range> => <element> {, <index_range> =>
<element> } )
and the result is an array of the element types. For example, if a, b, and c are
signals of type std_logic, then(a,b,c) is an array aggregate of type
std_logic_vector which has three elements. One use of aggregates is to
replicate a single bit. For example, if foo is a signal of type std_logic then
(7 downto 0 => foo) is an eight-bit signal in which each bit has the same
value as foo.
There are two main difference between aggregates and concatenation.
First, the result of a concatenation can be used only on the right-hand side of
an assignment statement (assignment statements are discussed below),
whereas an aggregate formed by combining signals or variables can be
assigned to. Second, while the VHDL-2008 standard specifies that
aggregates can be formed by combining elements with slices much like with
concatenation, some CAD tools support only array aggregates formed from
element types or slices that are of equal size.
VHDL expressions are composed of terminals (signals, variables, or
constants, or slices thereof) and operators potentially grouped by
parentheses. VHDL-2008 includes the operators listed in Table B.2. The
rows contain operators of equal precedence with highest precedence at the
top.
The ∗∗ operator, in the first row, is the exponentiation operator. The not
operator operates bit-wise so that not 4b"1001" is 4b"0110". The next two
rows contain the common arithmetic operators: multiplication (∗), division
(/), modulo (mod), addition (+), and subtraction (-).
The fourth row in Table B.2 contains the shift and rotate operands. The
shift operators (sll, srl, sla, sra) begin with "s", followed by the direction
("l" for left, "r" for right) followed by "l" if the shift is “logical” and "r" if
the shift is arithmetic. Figure 8.3 provides an example of using the sll
operator. A rotate operation is like a shift except that bits shifted out one side
are shifted in the other side. For example, rotate left by one position applied
to "1000" gives "0001". The keyword ror means rotate to the right and rol
means rotate to the left.
The next row contains comparison operators which take two operands of
equivalent type and produce a result of type boolean. The /= operator
checks for inequality. Some of the comparison operators and all of the

--- Page 866 ---
arithmetic operators for std_logic_vector are defined in the package
ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all and ieee.std_logic_signed.all. Adding
a use clause for either will cause all std_logic_vector values within the
design entity to be interpreted as unsigned or signed, respectively (see
Chapter 10 for a discussion of signed versus unsigned numbers).
Table B.2. VHDL-2008 operators used in this book, grouped by precedence (highest to lowest)
** not
* / mod
+ - &
sll srl sla sra rol ror
= /= < <= > >=
and or nand nor xor xnor
??
The next row contains the logical operators which combine two
subexpressions. The logical operators are bit-wise. This means that when
they are applied to two std_logic_vector operands each bit of the resulting
std_logic_vector is computed by combining the corresponding bits of the
operands. For example, the result of
"1010" and "1100"
is "1000".
The VHDL-2008 condition operator “??” converts a std_logic value to
type boolean. In contexts where the conversion can be inferred it is not
necessary to include the condition operator. For examples of implicit
conversion in an if statement see Figures 17.3 and 17.3. An example of
explicit conversion can be found in Figure 9.4.
B.6 CONCURRENT STATEMENTS
The syntax for concurrent statements is given by

--- Page 867 ---
<concurrent_statements> ::= <concurrent_statement> ;
{ <concurrent_statement> ; }
where
<concurrent_statement> ::=
<concurrent_signal_assignment_statement> |
<component_instantiation_statement> |
<process_statement>
Each concurrent statement operates in parallel. Hence, the order of
individual concurrent statements within an architecture body does not matter.
The rest of this section examines the first two forms of concurrent statement:
concurrent signal assignment statements and component instantiation
statements. We leave discussion of the process statement to Section B.9.
B.6.1 Concurrent signal assignment
There are three forms of concurrent signal assignment:
<concurrent_signal_assignment_statement> ::=
<concurrent_simple_signal_assignment> |
<concurrent_conditional_signal_assignment> |
<concurrent_selected_signal_assignment>
Concurrent simple signal assignment
The concurrent simple signal assignment is the simplest form and has the
syntax
<name> <= <expression>;
where <name> is either the identifier for a signal or an array slice (described
below). This statement re-evaluates <expression> and assigns the result to
<name> any time any of the signals inside <expression> changes. The “<=”
compound delimiter indicates an assignment to a signal. For example,
assuming signals output, a, b, and c have type std_logic, the concurrent
simple signal assignment
output <= (a and b) or (b and c));

--- Page 868 ---
defines the signal output to be ’1’ whenever a and b are both ’1’ or both b
and c are ’1’. In this example, whenever one of the input signals a, b, or c
changes output will be be updated immediately. For example, the sequence
of two concurrent simple signal assignments
t <= (a and b);
output <= t or (b and c);
has identical effect when the two statements are reversed as follows,
output <= t or (b and c);
t <= (a and b);
and both produce the same values for output as the single line
output <= (a and b) or (b and c);
Perhaps the best way to understand how concurrent signal assignments work
is to visualize them as a circuit schematic. Figure B.2 illustrates the circuit
corresponding to the above concurrent simple signal assignments. Chapter 3
introduces logic gates such as and, or and not along with schematic
diagrams.
Concurrent conditional signal assignment
The concurrent conditional signal assignment statement has the syntax
<name> <= <expression> when <condition> else {
<expression> when <condition> else } <expression>;
Figure B.2. Schematic diagram corresponding to concurrent simple signal assignment example.
where <condition> is an expression that evaluates to a boolean type. The
value assigned to <name> is given by the first <expression> whose
corresponding <condition> evaluates to true. The assignment is continuous,
so whenever any signal read on the right-hand side of the signal assignment

--- Page 869 ---
operator changes the value assigned will change. For example a 4 : 2 priority
encoder (Section 8.5) can be specified using the following concurrent
conditional signal assignment statement:
Enc <= "11" when input(3) = ’1’ else "10" when
input(2) = ’1’ else "01" when input(1) = ’1’ else
"00";
Here Enc is assigned the value "11" whenever input(3) equals ’1’. If
input(3) is not equal to ’1’ but input(2) equals ’1’ then Enc is assigned
the value "10". If input(3) is not equal to ’1’ and input(2) is not equal to
’1’ but input(1) equals ’1’ then Enc is assigned the value "01". In all other
cases Enc is assigned the value "00".
Concurrent selected signal assignment
The concurrent selected signal assignment statement has the syntax
with <name1> select
<name2> <= { <expression> when <choices>, }
<expression> when others;
where the non-terminal <choices> is given by
<choices> ::= <const_expression> { "|"
<const_expression> }
and <const_expression> is an expression with a value that does not change.
Note that the pipe symbol (|) in the pattern for <choices> is part of VHDL.
The double quotes should not appear – they are used here to differentiate it
from the EBNF pipe symbol. The operation of the selected signal assignment
is to assign to <name2> the value of the <expression> with a corresponding
<choices> that contains a <const_expression> equal to <name1>. The
values of each <const_expression> in the selected assignment must be
distinct. The VHDL keyword others will match any value of <name1> that
does not have a corresponding <const_expression>. For example,
with sel select
output <= in_a when 2d"3",

--- Page 870 ---
in_b when 2d"1" | 2d"2",
in_c when others;
describes a combinational logic circuit built from a 4 → 1 binary select
multiplexer (multiplexers are described in Section 8.3). The circuit has
inputs in_a, in_b, in_c, and sel. If sel is equal to 2d"3" then the value
assigned to output is whatever the current value of in_a is. If sel is equal to
either 2d"1" or 2d"2" then the value assigned to output is whatever the
current value of in_b is. As indicated by the keyword others, in all other
cases the value assigned to output is the current value of in_c.
You may be wondering what the difference is between conditional signal
assignment and selected signal assignment. One key difference is that in
selected signal assignment the choices must be non-overlapping, whereas in
conditional signal assignment overlap is permitted. Conditional signal
assignment handles overlapping choices by allowing you to express priority
in what value is assigned. Another key difference is that the choices for
selected signal assignment must be a constant, whereas the choices for
conditional signal assignment can be an arbitrary expression.
B.6.2 Component instantiation
The second form of concurrent statement is component instantiation.
Component instantiation enables you to use one design entity as a
component within another design entity. By doing so it enables you to
provide a structural description showing how to build a complex circuit by
connecting a collection of smaller circuits together using signals. A structural
description is essentially equivalent to drawing a schematic diagram.
Conceptually, each instance of a design entity inside the larger design can be
thought of as a discrete chip, much like those shown in Figure 28.8, which
illustrates six chips wired together on a prototyping board. In practice the
component instances in a VHDL structural description are combined into a
single circuit by the CAD tools. Owing to some similarities between VHDL
component instantiation syntax and the syntax for a function call in popular
programming languages such as C, C++, and Java, students new to hardware
design tend to initially confuse component instantiation with the action of
calling a function as encountered in software design. Do not make this
mistake!
The syntax for a component instantiation statement is

--- Page 871 ---
<instance_label>: <unit> [ generic map ( <assoc_list>
) ] port map ( <assoc_list> );
where <instance_label> is an identifier that uniquely identifies this
particular instance of the component and <unit> identifies the component
being instantiated. A simple example demonstrating component instantiation
is given in Figure B.4 later. This figure will be described after we have
looked at the details of the component instantiation syntax above.
For the component instantiation syntax description above there are three
formats for specifying <unit>:
<unit> ::= <component_identifier> | entity
<entity_identifer> [ ( <architecture_identifier> ) ]
| configuration <configuration_identifier>
Here <component_identifier> is the identifier of a component from a
component declaration (Section B.4), <entity_identifier> is the identifier
from an entity declaration (Section B.4), and <configuration_identifier>
is the identifier from a configuration declaration (Section 7.1.8). For all three
formats the identifier must be visible in the scope of the component
instantiation statement. There are two ways to make a component identifier
visible. The first is to include a component declaration in the architecture
declarative part of the architecture body containing the component
instantiation statement. This is the approach taken in Figure B.4) – notice the
component declarations for NOT_GATE and AND_GATE inside the architecture
body for NOR_GATE. The second approach is to include a component
declaration inside a package declaration and include a use clause for that
package before the entity declaration associated with the architecture body
containing the component instantiation (e.g., see Figures 7.23 and 7.26).
A single VHDL entity declaration can be associated with multiple
architecture bodies, each with its own architecture identifier. Hence, VHDL
enables you to specify which architecture body should be used with a
component instantiation either by specifying it explicitly using
<architecture_identifier> using the second format above or by using a
configuration statement and the third format above.
The second format for specifying <unit> is sometimes called direct
instantiation. An example of direct instantiation is shown in Figure 7.18. In
this figure the entity identifier is prefaced by “work.” to indicate that the
VHDL compiler should look for the entity declaration in the working library

--- Page 872 ---
containing all design entities that have been compiled so far. We recommend
using direct instantiation only for testbenches, since direct instantiation
prevents you from using a configuration statement to later configure which
architecture is used for a given component instantiation statement (see the
discussion of configuration statements in Section 7.1.8). An example of the
third format for specifying <unit>, when using a configuration, is shown
in Figure 7.21.
Returning to the syntax for a component instantiation statement, we note
that the generic map portion is optional. If it is present, the generic map
enables you to specify the constants declared within the generic clause of the
entity declaration. To use an analogy, the generic map allows the designer to
customize the circuit much like one might ask a car dealer to customize a car
by tinting the windows. The port map portion is required because it is used
to specify how to connect external signals to the inputs and outputs of the
component being instantiated.
Both generic map and port map are followed by an association list
(<assoc_list>). There are two forms of association list that may be used in
a component instantiation – positional and named association:
<assoc_list> ::= <named_association_list> |
<positional_association_list>
where
<named_association_list> ::= <formal> => <actual> { ,
<formal> => <actual> }
and
<positional_association_list> ::= <actual> { ,
<actual> }
In the named association list format <formal> refers to the identifier name in
the generic or port clause of the corresponding entity or configuration
declaration. The arrow compound delimiter “=>” indicates that the formal
identifier is connected to the signal identified by <actual>. Here <actual>
is the name of a signal or a slice (Section B.5) of a signal declared in the
architecture declarative part of the architecture body containing the
component instantiation. In Figure B.4 the component instances with labels
U1 and U2 use named association. The named association format is preferred

--- Page 873 ---
when instantiating a component with many inputs and outputs or generic
parameters because it reduces the chances of introducing an error when
making changes. For components with only a few inputs and outputs or
generic parameters, and especially for those that do not change (e.g.,
fundamental building blocks like those described in Chapter 8), the
positional association list is preferred. In the positional association syntax
each <actual> is connected to a formal in the order in which the formals are
declared. In Figure B.4 the component instance with label U3 uses positional
association. VHDL-2008 introduces the ability to use an expression for
<actual> for ports with mode in. We make use of this feature in this book
because it can make VHDL more readable. Below we discuss two examples
of component instantiation. Many more examples can be found throughout
the book.
Figure B.3. Schematic diagram corresponding to VHDL component instantiation example in Figure
B.4.
Figure B.3 is a schematic diagram showing one way to construct a NOR
gate by combining two separate instances of a NOT gate with a single
instance of an AND gate. Figure B.4 illustrates a corresponding VHDL
structural description of this circuit using component instantiation. Note that
since they are concurrent statements the order of the component
instantiations in the architecture body for NOR_GATE does not matter. Also
notice that we can use the same name for signals and ports in different
design entities. For example, the identifier a is used for the first input of
NOR_GATE as well as the first input of AND_GATE. The component
instantiations with label U1 and U2 use named association, whereas the
component instantiation with label U3 uses positional association.
A more complex example demonstrating the use of generic constants and
generic map in a component instantiation is provided in Figures B.5 and
B.6. The SORTER design entity in Figure B.6 instantiates a single copy of
the magnitude comparator design entity. Note that the generic clause of

--- Page 874 ---
MagComp sets k equal to 8, which would be the default value of k if there
were no generic map clause in the component instantiation with label CMP.
However, the component instantiation does include a generic map clause.
The generic clause uses named notation, though we could also have used
positional notation.
B.7 MULTIPLE SIGNAL DRIVERS AND
RESOLUTION FUNCTIONS
What happens if multiple concurrent statements try to drive the same signal?
In an actual circuit the signal corresponds to a wire and the values
correspond to voltages. If one circuit, corresponding to a first concurrent
statement, drives the signal to logic 1 while another circuit, corresponding to
a second concurrent statement, drives the signal to logic 0, then a large
current would flow and the circuit would likely be damaged. When used for
simulation, VHDL models such cases through the use of a resolution
function. A resolution function takes as input all the different values being
driven on a signal and outputs the value that will be given to the signal. In
practice you will not likely need to define your own resolution functions,
since they are predefined for important types such as std_logic and
std_logic_vector. For example, for a signal of type std_logic with two
drivers with one driving a value of ’1’ and the other driving a value of ’0’
the resolved value during simulation will be ’X’. Hence, a value of ’X’
observed while simulating a testbench typically indicates a serious bug in the
design that should be identified. If instead the second driver drives ’Z’ (high
impedance), the resolved value will be ’0’, corresponding to the value of the
first driver. The high impedance state of the second driver is essentially its
way of saying it has “no opinion” as to what the value (i.e., voltage) of the
signal should be.

--- Page 876 ---
Figure B.4. Example of component instantiation. Here a NOR gate is created by combining two NOT
gates with a single AND gate. A corresponding schematic diagram is shown in Figure B.3.
An example of how to specify a 2 → 1 binary-select multiplexer using tri-
state buffers illustrates how resolution functions operate in practice. The
VHDL is shown in Figure B.7 and the corresponding circuit diagram is
shown in Figure B.8. In this example the line “b <= a1 when s = ’1’ else
’Z’;” uses a conditional signal assignment statement (Section B.6.1) that
assigns a1 to b when signal s is equal to ’1’ and ’Z’ otherwise. Similarly,
the line “b <= a0 when s = ’0’ else ’Z’;” drives a0 onto b when s
equals ’0’ and ’Z’ otherwise. Hence, if s equals ’1’ then b is driven with
the value of a1 and ’Z’. The resolved value will be equal to whatever value
a1 has. If a1 is currently ’0’ then b will be driven to ’0’ and if a1 is ’1’
then b will be driven to ’1’. As noted in Section 4.3.4, because of the
potential for a short circuit, tri-state circuits should be avoided.
Figure B.5. Schematic diagram corresponding to the VHDL component instantiation example with
generic map in Figure B.6.
B.8 ATTRIBUTES
VHDL provides a syntax feature called an attribute to obtain or specify
additional information about elements of a design. To use an attribute one
specifies the attribute name using the syntax
<prefix> ’ <attribute_name> [ ( <expression> ) ]

--- Page 877 ---
where <prefix> can be any syntactic element with a name (e.g., a signal
name, package name, entity name, etc.), <attribute_name> is the name of
the attribute, and <expression> is an optional expression passed as an
argument to a function for those attributes that return a function. Depending
upon the attribute name, the result of applying the attribute name to a prefix
can be a type, value, signal, index range, or function.
One reason for a user to specify an attribute is to convey additional
information about the design to a CAD tool. An example of specifying an
attribute for this purpose can be found in Figure 8.51, where two attributes
are declared with the keyword attribute and used to help specify the
contents of a read-only memory. Since such use is CAD-tool-specific, in this
appendix we will not describe the syntax for declaring new attributes. CAD-
tool-specific attributes are naturally described in the associated CAD tool’s
documentation. Unless you are developing CAD tools yourself, you will
probably never have a specific need to define your own VHDL attributes.
However, if you want to learn about the general syntax for declaring and
defining new attributes consult the VHDL language reference manual [55] or
Ashenden [3].
The VHDL standard specifies numerous predefined attributes, and some
of the more widely supported ones are listed in Table B.3. The T’left,
T’right, T’length, and T’range attributes can be helpful when declaring
signals or accessing an element or slice of a signal. The T’event and
T’stable attributes are particularly relevant to the following discussion on
the process statement. Both of these attributes are related to the notion of an
event on a signal, which in turn is related to the notion of a transaction. A
transaction is said to occur at time instants when an assignment is made to a
signal. An event is said to occur when an assignment results in a signal
changing its value. Thus all events are transactions, but not all transactions
are events. The attribute T’active is true when an assignment occurs to a
signal or variable irrespective of whether or not the value changes. We list it
here to emphasize the distinction between events and transactions. The
T’active attribute should not be used in synthesizable VHDL. The
T’delayed(N) attribute is similarly not synthesizable.

--- Page 878 ---
Figure B.6. Example of component instantiation with generic parameters. A corresponding schematic
diagram is shown in Figure B.5. Note that while MagComp has entity and component declarations with
k equal to 8 this value of k is overridden by generic map when it is instantiated to create CMP.
Table B.3. Selected predefined attributes in VHDL
T′left Integer value of leftmost index for the signal or variable T
T′right Integer value of rightmost index for the signal or variable T

--- Page 879 ---
T′length Integer value indicating number of elements in multi-bit signal or variable T
T′range Index range of signal or variable T
T′event Boolean signal equal to TRUE at instants when an event occurs on T, otherwise FALSE
T′stable Boolean signal equal to TRUE at times when an event did not occur on T and FALSE
at instants when an event does occur
T′active Boolean signal equal to TRUE at times when a transaction occurs on T, otherwise
FALSE
T′delayed(N)Signal equal to T delayed by N time units
Figure B.7. Tri-state buffer in VHDL.
Figure B.8. Schematic of 2 → 1 multiplexer corresponding to that VHDL in Figure B.7.
B.9 PROCESS STATEMENTS
The final form of concurrent statement is the process statement. A process
statement provides a way to describe a logic circuit’s behavior at a higher

--- Page 880 ---
level of abstraction using sequentially ordered statements. Since a process
statement is a concurrent statement, each process may “execute” the
sequential statements it contains in parallel with sequential statements
contained inside other process statements. Every concurrent statement in an
architecture body can be viewed conceptually as a separate process
statement.
The main obstacle to correctly and effectively using process statements is
that the process syntax looks so similar to software that it can be hard not to
think it operates exactly like a program running on a computer. There are
important differences with respect to timing discussed below. In addition,
you must learn to use a restricted syntax subset to ensure the hardware
synthesized from your VHDL descriptions behaves as you expect. Indeed,
the sequential statements inside a VHDL process describe only the behavior
of the logic circuit. The actual implementation of the circuit is determined by
the CAD tool used to synthesize a digital circuit that matches the behavior of
your VHDL description.3 As an example, note the vast difference in
appearance between the VHDL process statement in Figure 7.2 and the
corresponding gate-level representation generated by a CAD synthesis tool
shown in Figures 7.3 and 7.4.
This book uses process statements both for specifying the behavior of
digital logic circuits (e.g., Figure 7.2) and when specifying test scripts (e.g.,
Figure 7.18). This section describes the general syntax relevant to both,
while Section B.10 focuses on the syntax restrictions required for hardware
synthesis.
The process statement syntax is summarized in Figure B.9 and a simple
example describing a2→ 1 binary-select multiplexer (Section 8.3) is given in
Figure B.10. In Figure B.10, the process writes the value of A to C when sel
is ’1’ and writes the value of B to C otherwise. Below we first discuss the
sensitivity list and the conceptual model of a process, including the
important question of when sequential statements execute, then look at the
various forms of sequential statement syntax.
B.9.1 The process sensitivity list and execution timing
In the terminology of the VHDL language specification [55] a VHDL
process is said to “execute” the sequential statements it contains whenever
any signal in the sensitivity list of that process has an event – i.e., whenever a

--- Page 881 ---
signal in the sensitivity list has a change in value. Conceptually, a process
executes the sequential statements it contains one after the other until it
reaches a wait statement or the last sequential statement inside the process.
At that point the process becomes suspended. The time elapsed between
executing different sequential statements inside the same process is
infinitesimally small. If the process reaches the last statement then it is
suspended until a new event occurs on one of the signals in the sensitivity
list of that process.
For example, in Figure B.10 a change of value on any of the signals sel,
A, and/or B listed in the sensitivity list will cause the sequential statements
inside the process to execute completely until reaching the end of the
process, possibly changing the value of C. The process in Figure B.10 will
completely execute the sequential statements it contains again, starting from
the beginning of the process, whenever there is a new change on one of the
three signals sel, A, and B listed in the sensitivity list.
Figure B.9. Syntax summary for a process in VHDL-2008.

--- Page 882 ---
Figure B.10. Example VHDL process that describes a 2 → 1 binary-select multiplexer.
Figure B.11 illustrates the timing of these steps by plotting the inputs sel,
A, and B along with the output C. Initially, all inputs are at logic level zero
and C is also zero. At time t1 input B changes from logic level zero to logic
level one. Since B is listed in the sensitivity list, the process is triggered to
execute at time t1. The process causes the output C to change to logic level
one. The transition of C occurs an infinitesimal time after the change on B. In
a simulation waveform the change in C appears to occur at the same time as
the change in B. In essence, you could say that the if statement executed
“infinitely fast.” In a real multiplexer circuit there would be some delay
between the change on the inputs and the output. Indeed, CAD tools can be
configured to simulate these delays by taking into account the results of
synthesizing our VHDL description to a particular target technology.
However, as far as the VHDL language standard is concerned, there is
essentially no delay between the input and output changing for the VHDL in
Figure B.10. Similar changes are shown at times t2, t4, and t5. At time t3
input B changes from logic one to logic zero and the process executes, but
the value assigned to output C is zero so no change occurs on C.

--- Page 883 ---
Figure B.11. Simulation waveform for VHDL example in Figure B.10. The values of inputs sel, A,
and B were chosen to illustrate the effect of the VHDL in Figure B.10 on output C. Arrows indicate
causality.
In this book the only uses of a process without a sensitivity list are for test
scripts (e.g., see Figure 3.8) and for defining a clock signal to input to a
synthesizable design entity being tested (see Figure 14.17). Both of these
forms of process are not intended to be synthesized to hardware.4 If there is
no sensitivity list, the process begins execution immediately and will execute
again from the beginning immediately after executing the last sequential
statement it contains (i.e., forming an infinite loop).
If the sensitivity list contains the VHDL-2008 keyword all then it is as if
all signals read by any sequential statement inside the process are listed in
the sensitivity list. For example, in Figure B.10 every signal that is read
inside the process, namely sel, A, and B, is also listed in the sensitivity list.
Hence, we could have written “process (all)” instead of
“process(sel,A,B)”. However, note that the sensitivity list has a very
different meaning than the arguments of a function in a typical programming
language. In particular, as you will see in Section B.10, sometimes you must
not include some signals that are read inside a process in the sensitivity list
of that process. Do not make the mistake of thinking a process is like a
function!
The actual hardware synthesized from a VHDL process description will be
implemented using logic gates that have small delays. As illustrated in

--- Page 884 ---
Figure 7.4, these gates will not correspond to the lines of VHDL in an easy-
to-identify way. However, if the VHDL used is restricted to a synthesizable
subset of the language, such as that summarized below in Section B.10, then
the hardware circuit will have the same behavior as that described by the
VHDL process statement except for minor differences due to gate and wiring
delays. Such differences do not matter for synchronous circuits when proper
allowances are made for timing (Chapter 15).
The contrast between a VHDL process and a software program is
instructive. When debugging a compiled software program it is possible to
stop at a computer instruction corresponding to a single line and to inspect
the state of the running program using a debugger program (e.g., gdb – the
GNU Debugger). In contrast, after synthesizing a VHDL process to
hardware it is not possible to peek inside to see each individual sequential
statement executing inside a process because the sequential description is
replaced by a network of wires and digital logic gates (which are not the
same as computer instructions).
Below we consider the various forms of sequential statements allowed
inside a process statement.
B.9.2 Wait and report statements
The wait and report statements are used only for testbenches, so their syntax
will not be covered in detail in this appendix. See the example in Figure 3.8
and the accompanying description in Section 3.6.
B.9.3 If statements
The syntax for the if statement is illustrated in Figure B.12, where
<condition> is an expression of type BOOLEAN. Only the sequential
statements following the first <condition> part that evaluates to TRUE are
executed and the rest are skipped. Note that, since it is a sequential
statement, an if statement may appear only inside a process statement. A
simple example of an if statement can be found in Figure B.10, which was
discussed above. In the general form there can be any number of elsif
parts. Regardless of how many elsif parts there are, as far as the VHDL
language standard is concerned, the entire if statement takes an infinitesimal

--- Page 885 ---
time to execute. An example of an if statement using elsif can be found in
Figure 7.8.
B.9.4 Case and matching case statements
The syntax for the case statement is summarized in Figure B.13. When the
case statement is executed the value of <expression> is evaluated and
compared with <choices> following the keyword when in each case
alternative. There should be exactly one case alternative that matches for all
possible values of <expression>. The sequential statements following the
arrow compound delimiter (=>) for this case alternative are executed. For the
last case alternative <choices> can be the VHDL keyword others which
will match any value of <expression> that does not match an earlier case
alternative.5 If the question mark (?) is included the case statement is said to
be a matching case statement. In that case the <choices> may include don’t
care values (‘-’ in std_logic) that will match any value in the
corresponding bit position of <expression>.
Figure B.12. If statement syntax. Can only be used inside a process.
Figure B.13. Case statement syntax. Can only be used inside a process.

--- Page 886 ---
Figure B.14. Example of a matching case statement. Output B is set to ’1’ when input A is either "10"
or "11". A when others case alternative should be included to ensure all possible input conditions are
covered including std_logic meta values such as ’U’.
An example of a matching case statement is shown in Figure B.14, and
Figure B.15 illustrates an example waveform, showing how it behaves as
input A changes. Initially, A equals "000" and the output B equals ’1’. At
time t1 input A(0) changes from ’0’ to ’1’. Since A is in the sensitivity list
the process is triggered and the case statement executes. The value of A,
which is now "001" is compared against each case alternative. The second
case alternative, “when "001"=> B <= ’0’;”, matches, so the statement B
<= ’0’ is executed and the value of B changes from ’1’ to ’0’. A key point
to observe is that, as far as the VHDL language standard is concerned, the
change in B occurs an infinitesimal amount of time after the change in A(0).
At time t2 input A(1) changes from ’0’ to ’1’ and the process is executed
again from the beginning. Because A is now "011", the case alternative
“when "01-"=> B <= ’1’;” matches, since "01-" matches both "010" and
"011". Consequently the output B changes to ’1’. At time t3 input A(0)
changes back to ’0’ and the process executes from the beginning again. This
time A is "010", which matches the same case alternative, and the output

--- Page 887 ---
does not change. At time t4 input A(2) changes and now A is "110", which
matches the case alternative “when others => B <= ’0’;”, so B changes to
’0’. At time t5 input A(0) changes and when the process executes A equals
"111", which matches “when "101"| "111"=> B <= ’1’;”, so B changes
back to ’1’.
Figure B.15. Simulation waveform for the VHDL example in Figure B.14. The value of input A was
chosen to illustrate the effect of the VHDL in Figure B.14 on output B. Arrows indicate causality.
B.9.5 Signal and variable assignment statements
In this section we discuss an important nuance in the timing of assignments
to signals after first introducing VHDL variables. A variable declaration has
the following syntax:
variable <identifier> {, <identifier> } :
<subtype_indication> [ := <expression> ];
Variable declarations are placed in the declarative portion of the process in
which the variable is to be used, before the keyword begin (see Figure B.9).
A variable is used to communicate a value within a single process, whereas a
signal is typically used to communicate values between sequential
statements inside a process and other concurrent statements outside the
process. Assignments to a variable always use a colon followed by an equal

--- Page 888 ---
sign (:=), whereas assignments to a signal always use a less-than symbol
followed by an equal sign (<=). However, a more important difference is that
a variable assignment takes effect before the next sequential statement is
executed, whereas a signal assignment takes effect only after the process has
been suspended – i.e., has finished executing all sequential statements or has
reached a wait statement.
Figure B.16 provides an example that helps illustrate the difference
between assignments to variables and signals. It also provides another
example of a sensitivity list. In this example the process executes when input
signal clk changes – i.e., goes from logic value ’0’ to ’1’, which is called a
rising edge, or goes from ’1’ to ’0’, which is called a falling edge. The if
statement condition evaluates to true if clk is ’1’. Now, since the if
statement is evaluated only on the rising or falling edge of clk, and since the
if condition is evaluated an infinitesimal amount of time after the change in
the signal value, it can be inferred6 that the sequential statements inside the
body of the if statement are executed only on the rising edge of clk. An
equivalent but more readable way to write the if statement using the VHDL
built-in function rising_edge is “if rising_edge(clk) then”.


--- Page 889 ---
Figure B.16. Example of a process containing both variable and signal assignment statements.
Figure B.17. Simulation waveform for VHDL example in Figure B.16. Initially x, y, and z have value
’U’, which means that in a real circuit they can be either logic level zero or logic level one.
Figure B.17 illustrates how outputs x, y, and z change for the given inputs
clk and w. Transitions on the outputs are drawn slanted to emphasize that
they change in response to changes on the inputs. Figure B.18 illustrates the
hardware synthesized from the VHDL description in Figure B.16.
Figure B.18. Schematic diagram corresponding to the VHDL example in Figure B.16.

--- Page 890 ---
To better understand the waveforms in Figure B.17 and the schematic in
Figure B.18, let us consider the four assignment statements inside the if
statement body in Figure B.16. The first assignment statement, tmp := w,
assigns the value of w at the time of the rising edge of clk to the variable
tmp. Since tmp is a variable, the assignment becomes effective before the
next sequential statement, x <= tmp, is executed. This means that when x <=
tmp is executed the value read for tmp and assigned to x is also the value that
w has at the time of the rising edge of clk. Now, consider the next
assignment statement, y <= x. Since x is a signal assigned earlier in the
execution of the process and since we have not reached the end of the
process, the assignment to x has not yet taken effect. This means that the
value assigned to y will be the value of x prior to the assignment x <= tmp.
Since the process executes only the statements inside the if statement body
on a rising edge of clk, the value assigned to y is the value that was assigned
to x on the prior rising edge of clk. This delay is captured in the schematic
in Figure B.18 by the introduction of a second D flip-flop between w and y.
The value assigned to z on the rising edge of clk is the value of w passed
through a not-gate. Note that, while the particular values in each assignments
differ, the outputs x, y, and z are all updated at the same time, immediately
after the rising edge of clk.
As illustrated by the above example, the delay of signal assignments
inside a process can make the behavior of VHDL code harder to understand
when a signal assigned by one sequential statement is read by another
sequential statement inside the same process. Hence, a good rule of thumb is
to always use variables when communicating a value between sequential
statements within a single process and use signals to communicate values
between different processes.
B.10SYNTHESIZABLE PROCESS
STATEMENTS
The prior section discussed the syntax and semantics of the process
statement as defined in the VHDL language standard [55]. As noted earlier,
CAD tools used for synthesis cannot generate hardware for an arbitrary
VHDL description that is syntactically valid but instead guarantee only

--- Page 891 ---
matching behavior between simulation and synthesis for a restricted subset
of the language. This section discusses a set of rules that ensure the process
statements you write are synthesizable. These rules are broader than the style
guidelines. The style guidelines provide rules for ensuring that your VHDL
is readable and maintainable as well as synthesizable. However, in cases
where one finds it necessary to break the style guidelines it is still essential
that one follows the rules described here.
Figure B.19. Example of a process violating rule C1. The signals a and b are missing from the
sensitivity list.
We describe several rules that ensure a process is synthesizable. Note that
which styles are synthesizable is CAD-tool-specific, but these rules are
simple enough that almost every tool should support them. Also, any given
CAD tool may be able to synthesize VHDL that does not follow these rules,
but restricting your VHDL to these rules will ensure your VHDL is more
portable in case you need to synthesize your VHDL using a different CAD
tool at some later time.
Probably the most important rule to remember is that each and every
process in your design must be one of three7 types: type 1, purely
combinational; type 2, edge-sensitive; and type 3, edge-sensitive with an
asynchronous reset.
B.10.1 Type 1: purely combinational
To describe a combinational logic circuit using a process two rules must be
observed.
Rule C1. All inputs to the combinational logic block must appear in the
sensitivity list or the sensitivity list must use the VHDL-2008 keyword
all.

--- Page 892 ---
Rule C2. All outputs of the combinational logic circuit must be
assigned for any pattern of inputs.
Figures B.19, B.20, and B.21 illustrate examples that violate these rules. In
Figure B.19 the signals a and b are missing from the sensitivity list, thus
violating rule C1. In Figure B.20 the signal y is not assigned when input a is
equal to ’1’ and input b is equal to ’0’, thus violating rule C2. Figure B.21
shows a similar example involving a matching case statement. Section A.4
of the VHDL style guide shows additional examples.
B.10.2 Type 2: edge-sensitive
For a process describing a circuit that updates its output on the rising or
falling edge of a clock, also known as edge-sensitive logic, to be
synthesizable, the following rules must be observed.
Figure B.20. Example of a process violating rule C2. The output y is not assigned if input a is ’1’ and
input b is ’0’.
Figure B.21. Second example of a process violating rule C2. The output y is not assigned if input
state is "10" and input x is ’0’.
Rule E1. The sensitivity list should contain only the clock.

--- Page 893 ---
Rule E2. The process should describe behavior occurring on just a
single edge, either rising or falling, of a single clock.
Rule E3. In the sequential statements contained in the process the clock
signal should appear only in the condition of the outermost if statement,
which should not contain an else or elsif part. This if statement
should contain all other sequential statements within the process.
We have already seen an example of a process following the above rules
in Figure B.16. Figure B.22 illustrates an example violating rule E1.
Figure B.22. Example of a process violating rule E1. The sensitivity list should not contain A or B.
B.10.3 Type 3: edge-sensitive with asynchronous reset
In some designs it is desirable to employ flip-flops with an asynchronous
reset. An asynchronous reset sets the output of the flip-flop immediately
when the reset signal is asserted – i.e., before the next rising edge of the
clock. Although it is not employed in any of the examples in this book, we
describe the synthesis rules applicable for this type of hardware to help
provide contrast with the Type 1 and Type 2 processes above. This contrast
may help you to better understand the syntax restrictions required in order to
ensure your VHDL is synthesizable. This final type is interesting because it
combines level-sensitive and edge-sensitive behavior. A synthesizable
process describing a circuit with asynchronous reset should follow the
pattern in Figure B.23 or Figure B.24. Both patterns conform to the
following rules.

--- Page 894 ---
Figure B.23. Example of a synthesizable process describing asychronous reset behavior using the
X’event attribute.
Figure B.24. Example of a synthesizable process describing asychronous reset behavior using the
rising_edge function.
Rule A1. The sensitivity list contains only the clock and reset signals.
Rule A2. All outputs should be set to a constant value by the first
branch of the outermost if statement, which must test whether the reset
signal is asserted.
Rule A3. The single elsif part of the outermost if statement must
explicitly test for the desired clock edge.
Rule A4. All other if and case statements within the process must be
nested within the elsif part of the outermost if statement.
To follow rule A3 the elsif condition must check for the desired edge of
the clock. The reason is that a change in the reset input from asserted to
deasserted will cause the process to execute even though this event should
not cause the output of the circuit to change. VHDL provides two ways to
test for a clock edge.
The first approach is to use the event attribute, X’event. This is illustrated
in Figure B.23, where the elsif condition tests whether clk’event is true.
Since clk’event is true on both rising and falling edges of clk, the elsif
condition must also check that the event which caused the process to run and
which causes clk’event to be TRUE was a rising edge. It does this by

--- Page 895 ---
checking the current value of clk. If clk is ’1’ then, as in Figure B.16, it can
be inferred that the event was a rising edge of clk.
The second approach VHDL provides to test for a clock edge is to use the
built-in function rising_edge(X) which evaluates to true only at times when
X has a rising edge. This approach is illustrated for the same example in
Figure B.24. VHDL also defines a function falling_edge(X). The
rising_edge(X) and falling_edge(X) functions are recommended both
because they are more readable and because events involving std_logic
metavalues such as ’U’ are handled in such a way that the results of
simulation more closely correspond to the synthesized circuit.
1 For ModelSim enable VHDL-2008 support by selecting “Compiler Options...” then “Use 1076-
2008”. For Altera Quartus II adding --synthesis VHDL_INPUT_VERSION VHDL_2008” at the top of a
VHDL file enables support for VHDL-2008. Xilinx Vivado 2014.3 has beta support for VHDL-
2008 for synthesis enabled by typing “set_property vhdl_version vhdl_2008
[current_fileset]” in the Vivado TCL Console.
2 VHDL-2008 specifies support for generic types which would enable enumerated types to be
succinctly combined with explicitly instantiated state. However, few CAD tools support this feature.
3 Indeed this is true for all VHDL syntax.
4 It is possible to write a synthesizable process without a sensitivity list by either beginning the
process with a single wait until statement or ending it with a single wait on statement. Since they
are less commonly used, we do not discuss these forms in this book.
5 Some synthesis tools impose only the requirement that all combinations of logic one and zero are
covered.
6 Note that for purposes of synthesis CAD tools essentially ignore the possibility of transitions to or
from meta values, such as the std_logic value for unknown (’U’), which are meaningful only in
simulations.
7 In Figure 8.54 we employed a fourth type that describes the level-sensitive behavior of read–write
memories.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 896 ---
REFERENCES
[1] Altera Corporation, The LPM Quick Reference Guide. (San Jose, CA: Altera Corporation,
1996.)
[2] Arnold, H. L. and Faurote, F. L., Ford Methods and the Ford Shops. (New York: The
Engineering Magazine Company, 1915.)
[3] Ashenden, P. J., The Designer’s Guide to VHDL, 3rd edn. (New York: Morgan Kaufmann,
2008.)
[4] Atanasoff, J. V., Advent of electronic digital computing. Annals of the History of Computing
6: 3 (July– September 1984), 229–282.
[5] Babbage, H. P., ed., Babbage’s Calculating Engines: A Collection of Papers. (Los Angeles,
CA: Tomash, 1982.)
[6] Bailey, D., Vector computer memory bank contention. IEEE Transactions on Computers C-
36: 3 (March 1987), 293–298.
[7] Baker, K. and Van Beers, J., Shmoo plotting: the black art of IC testing. IEEE Design & Test
of Computers 14: 3 (July–September 1997), 90–97.
[8] Bakoglu, H. and Meindl, J., Optimal interconnection circuits for VLSI. IEEE Transactions on
Electron Devices 32: 5 (May 1985), 903–909.
[9] Bassett, R. W., Turner, M. E., Panner, J. H. et al., Boundary-scan design principles for
efficient LSSD ASIC testing. IBM Journal of Research and Development 34: 2.3 (March
1990), 339–354.
[10]Bentley, B., Validating the Intel ® Pentium ® 4 microprocessor. In International Conference
on Dependable Systems and Networks, 2001. DSN 2001 (Göteborg, 1–4 July, 2001), pp. 493–
498.
[11] Berlin, L., The Man Behind the Microchip: Robert Noyce and the Invention of Silicon Valley.
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.)
[12]Bhavsar, D., An algorithm for row–column self-repair of RAMs and its implementation in the
Alpha 21264. In Proceedings of International Test Conference, Atlantic City, NJ, 27–30
September, 1999 (Washington, D.C.: IEEE ITC), pp. 311–318.
[13]Boole, G., The Mathematical Analysis of Logic. (Cambridge: Macmillan, Barclay, and
Macmillan, 1847.)
[14]Boole, G., An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on which Are Founded the Mathematical
Theories of Logic and Probabilities. (Cambridge: Macmillan, 1854.)
[15]Booth, A. D., A signed binary multiplication technique. The Quarterly Journal of Mechanics
and Applied Mathematics 4: 2 (1951), 236–240.
[16]Brearley, H. C., ILLIAC II – a short description and annotated bibliography. IEEE
Transactions on Electronic Computers EC-14: 3 (June 1965), 399–403.
[17]Bristow, S., The history of video games. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics CE-23:
1 (February 1977), 58–68.

--- Page 897 ---
[18]Bromley, A. G., Charles Babbage’s analytical engine, 1838. Annals of the History of
Computing 4: 3 (July–September 1982), 196–217.
[19]Brooks, F., The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering. (Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1975.)
[20]Brown, S. and Vranesic, Z., Fundamentals of Digital Logic with VHDL Design, 3rd edn. (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.)
[21]Brunvand, E., Digital VLSI Chip Design with Cadence and Synopsys CAD Tools. (Boston,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 2010.)
[22]Bryant, R. E., MOSSIM: a switch-level simulator for MOS LSI. In Smith, R.-J. II (ed.), DAC
’81, Proceedings of the 18th Design Automation Conference, Nashville, TN, 29 June–1 July,
1981 (New York: ACM/IEEE, 1981), pp. 786–790.
[23]Buchholz, W., ed., Planning a Computer System – Project Stretch. (New York: McGraw-Hill,
Inc., 1962.)
[24]Capp, A., The Life and Times of the Shmoo. (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1948.)
[25]Cavanagh, J., Computer Arithmetic and Verilog HDL Fundamentals. (Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press, 2009.)
[26]Chandrakasan, A., Bowhill, W., and Fox, F., eds., Design of High-Performance
Microprocessor Circuits. (New York: IEEE Press, 2001.)
[27]Chaney, T. and Molnar, C., Anomalous behavior of synchronizer and arbiter circuits. IEEE
Transactions on Computers C-22: 4 (April 1973), 421–422.
[28]Chao, H. and Johnston, C., Behavior analysis of CMOS D flip-flops. IEEE Journal of Solid-
State Circuits 24: 5 (October 1989), 1454–1458.
[29]Chen, T.-C., Pan, S.-R., and Chang, Y.-W., Timing modeling and optimization under the
transmission line model. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems
VLSI-12: 1 (January 2004), 28–41.
[30]Culler, D., Singh, J., and Gupta, A., Parallel Computer Architecture: A Hardware/Software
Approach. (San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.)
[31]Dally, W. and Tell, S. The even/odd synchronizer: a fast, all-digital, periodic synchronizer. In
2010 IEEE Symposium on Asynchronous Circuits and Systems (ASYNC), Grenoble, 3–6 May,
2010 (New York: IEEE), pp. 75–84.
[32]Dally, W. and Towles, B., Route packets, not wires: on-chip interconnection networks. In
Proceedings of the 38th Design Automation Conference, DAC 2001, Las Vegas, NV, June 18–
22, 2001 (New York: ACM, 2001).
[33]Dally, W. J. and Poulton, J. W., Digital Systems Engineering. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998.)
[34]Dally, W. J. and Towles, B., Principles and Practices of Interconnection Networks. (New
York: Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.)
[35]Data Encryption Standard (DES), Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 46, 3
(1999).
[36]DeMorgan, A., Syllabus of a Proposed System of Logic. (London: Walton and Maberly, 1860.)
[37]Dennard, R., Gaensslen, F., Rideout, V., Bassous, E., and LeBlanc, A., Design of ion-
implanted MOSFETs with very small physical dimensions. IEEE Journal of Solid-State
Circuits 9: 5 (October 1974), 256–268.
[38]Earle, J., Latched carry-save adder. IBM Technical Disclosure Bulletin 7 (March 1985).
[39]Earle, J. G., Latched carry save adder circuit for multipliers, US Patent 3 340 388 1967.

--- Page 898 ---
[40]Eichelberger, E. B. and Williams, T. W., A logic design structure for LSI testability. In
Brinsfield, J. G., Szygenda, S. A., and Hightower, D. W. (eds.), Proceedings of the 14th
Design Automation Conference, DAC ’77, New Orleans, LO, June 20–22, 1977 (New York:
ACM, 1977), pp. 462–468.
[41]Elmore, W. C., The transient response of damped linear networks with particular regard to
wideband amplifiers. Journal of Applied Physics 19: 1 (January 1948), 55–63.
[42]Ercegovac, M. D. and Lang, T., Digital Arithmetic. (New York: Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.)
[43]Flynn, M. J. and Oberman, S. F., Advanced Computer Arithmetic Design. (New York: Wiley-
Interscience, 2001.)
[44]Golden, M., Hesley, S., Scherer, A. et al., A seventh-generation x86 microprocessor. IEEE
Journal of Solid-State Circuits 34: 11 (November 1999), 1466–1477.
[45]Hardy, G. H. and Wright, E. M., An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, 5th edn. (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1979.)
[46]Harris, D., A taxonomy of parallel prefix networks. In Matthews, M. B. (ed.), Conference
Record of the Thirty-Seventh Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, 2003,
PacificGrove,CA, 9–12 November, 2003 (New York: IEEE), vol. 2, pp. 2213–2217.
[47]Hennessy, J., Jouppi, N., Przybylski, S. et al., MIPS: a microprocessor architecture. In
Proceedings of the 15th Annual Workshop on Microprogramming, MICRO 15, Palo Alto, CA,
5–7 October, 1982 (New York: IEEE Press), pp. 17–22.
[48]Hennessy, J. L. and Patterson, D. A., Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, 5th
edn. (New York: Morgan Kaufmann, 2011.)
[49]Hodges, D., Jackson, H., and Saleh, R., Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits,
3rd edn. (New York: McGraw Hill, 2004.)
[50]Horowitz, M. A., Timing Models for MOS Circuits. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Stanford
University (1984).
[51]Huffman, D., A method for the construction of minimum-redundancy codes. Proceedings of
the IRE 40: 9 (September 1952), 1098–1101.
[52]Huffman, D., The synthesis of sequential switching circuits. Journal of the Franklin Institute
257: 3 (1954), 161–190.
[53]Hwang, K., Computer Arithmetic: Principles, Architecture and Design. (New York: John
Wiley and Sons Inc, 1979.)
[54]IEEE Standard for Radix-Independent Floating-point Arithmetic, ANSI/IEEE Standard 854-
1987 (1987).
[55]IEEE Standard VHDL Language Reference Manual, IEEE Standard 1076-2008 (2008).
[56]IEEE Standard for VHDL Register Transfer Level (RTL) Synthesis, IEEE Standard 1076.6-
2004 (2004).
[57]IEEE Standard Test Access Port and Boundary-scan Architecture, IEEE Std 1149.1-2001
(2001), i–200.
[58]IEEE Standard for Floating-point Arithmetic, IEEE Standard 754-2008 (2008), 1–58.
[59]ITU-T Recommendation G.711., Telecommunication Standardization Sector of ITU (1993).
[60]Jacob, B., Ng, S., and Wang, D., Memory Systems: Cache, DRAM, Disk. (New York: Morgan
Kaufmann, 1998.)
[61]Jain, S. and Agrawal, V., Test generation for MOS circuits using d-algorithm. In Radke, C. E.
(ed.), Proceedings of the 20th Design Automation Conference, DAS ’83, Miami Beach, FL,
June 27–29, 1983 (New York: ACM/IEEE, 1983), pp. 64–70.

--- Page 899 ---
[62]JEDEC, 2.5 V ± 0.2 V (normal range) and 1.8 V–2.7 V (wide range) power supply voltage
and interface standard for nonterminated digital integrated circuits. JESD8-5A.01 (June,
2006).
[63]Karnaugh, M., The map method for synthesis of combinational logic circuits. Transactions of
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 72: 1 (1953), 593–599.
[64]Kidder, T., The Soul of a New Machine. (New York: Little, Brown, and Co., 1981.)
[65]Kinoshita, K. and Saluja, K., Built-in testing of memory using an on-chip compact testing
scheme. IEEE Transactions on Computers C-35: 10 (October 1986), 862–870.
[66]Kistler, M., Perrone, M., and Petrini, F., Cell multiprocessor communication network: built for
speed. IEEE Micro 26: 3 (May–June 2006), 10–23.
[67]Ko, U. and Balsara, P., High-performance energy-efficient D-flip-flop circuits. IEEE
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration Systems VLSI-8: 1 (February 2000), 94–98.
[68]Kohavi, Z. and Jha, N. K., Switching and Finite Automata Theory, 3rd edn. (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009.)
[69]Kuck, D. and Stokes, R., The Burroughs scientific processor (BSP). IEEE Transactions on
Computers C-31: 5 (May 1982), 363–376.
[70]Ling, H., High-speed binary adder. IBM Journal of Research and Development 25: 3 (March
1981), 156–166.
[71]Lloyd, M. G., Uniform traffic signs, signals, and markings. Annals of the American Academy
of Political and Social Science 133 (1927), 121–127.
[72]McCluskey, E., Built-in self-test techniques. IEEE Transaction on Design and Test of
Computers 2: 2 (April 1985), 21–28.
[73]McCluskey, E. and Clegg, F., Fault equivalence in combinational logic networks. IEEE
Transactions on Computers C-20: 11 (November 1971), 1286–1293.
[74]McCluskey, E. J., Minimization of boolean functions. The Bell System Technical Journal 35: 6
(November 1956), 1417–1444.
[75]MacSorley, O., High-speed arithmetic in binary computers. Proceedings of the IRE 49: 1
(January 1961), 67–91.
[76]Marsh, B. W., Traffic control. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science 133 (1927), 90–113.
[77]Mead, C. and Rem, M., Minimum propagation delays in VLSI. IEEE Journal of Solid-State
Circuits 17: 4 (August 1982), 773–775.
[78]Meagher, R. E. and Nash, J. P., The ORDVAC. In AIEE–IRE ’51, Papers and Discussions
Presented at the Joint AIEE–IRE Computer Conference: Review of Electronic Digital
Computers, NewYork, December 10–12, 1951. (New York: ACM, 1951), pp. 37–43.
[79]Mealy, G. H., A method for synthesizing sequential circuits. The Bell System Technical
Journal 34, 5 (September 1955), 1045–1079.
[80]Micheli, G. D., Synthesis and Optimization of Digital Circuits. (New York: McGraw-Hill,
Inc., 1994.)
[81]Mick, J. and Brick, J., Bit-Slice Microprocessor Design. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980.)
[82]Montgomerie, G., Sketch for an algebra of relay and contactor circuits. Journal of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers – Part III: Radio and Communication Engineering 95: 36
(July 1948), 303–312.
[83]Moore, E. F., Gedanken Experiments on Sequential Machines. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1956), pp. 129–153.

--- Page 900 ---
[84]Moore, G. E., Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Electronics 38: 8 (April
1965), 114–117.
[85]Muller, R. S., Kamins, T. I., and Chan, M., Device Electronics for Integrated Circuits. (New
York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2003.)
[86]Myers, C. J., Asynchronous Circuit Design. (New York: Wiley-Interscience, 2001.)
[87]Nelson, W., Analysis of accelerated life test data – part i. The Arrhenius model and graphical
methods. IEEE Transactions on Electrical Insulation EI-6: 4 (December 1971), 165–181.
[88]Nickolls, J. and Dally, W., The GPU computing era. IEEE Micro 30: 2 (March–April 2010),
56–69.
[89]Noyce, R. N., Semiconductor device-and-lead structure, US Patent 2981877, 1961.
[90]O’Brien, F., The Apollo Guidance Computer: Architecture and Operation. (Chichester, UK:
Praxis, 2010.)
[91]Olson, H. F. and Belar, H., Electronic music synthesizer. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 27: 3 (1955), 595–612.
[92]Palnitkar, S., Verilog HDL, 2nd edn. (Mountain View, CA: Prentice Hall, 2003.)
[93]Patterson, D. A. and Hennessy, J. L., Computer Organization and Design: The
Hardware/Software Interface, 4th edn. (New York: Morgan Kaufmann, 2008.)
[94]Rabaey, J. M., Chandrakasan, A., and Nikolic, B., Digital Integrated Circuits – A Design
Perspective, 2nd edn. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.)
[95]Rau, B. R., Pseudo-randomly interleaved memory. In Vranesic, Z. G. (ed.), Proceedings of the
18th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, Toronto, May 27–30, 1991.
(New York: ACM Press, 1991), pp. 74–83.
[96]Riley, M., Bushard, L., Chelstrom, N., Kiryu, N., and Ferguson, S., Testability features of the
first-generation CELL processor. In Proceedings of 2005 IEEE International Test Conference,
ITC 2005, Austin, TX, November 8–10, 2005. (New York: IEEE, 2005), pp. 111–119.
[97]Rixner, S., Dally, W., Kapasi, U., Mattson, P., and Owens, J., Memory access scheduling. In
Proceedings of the 27th International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2000 (June
2000), pp. 128–138.
[98]Russo, P., Wang, C.-C., Baltzer, P., and Weisbecker, J., Microprocessors in consumer products.
Proceedings of the IEEE 66: 2 (February 1978), 131–141.
[99]Segal, R., BDSYN: Logic Description Translator BDSIM; Switch-level Simulator, Technical
Report UCB/ERL M87/33. EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley (1987).
[100]Shannon, C. E., A symbolic analysis of relay and switching circuits. Transactions of the
American Institute of Electrical Engineers 57: 12 (December 1938), 713–723.
[101]Sorin, D. J, Hill, M. D., and Wood, D. A, A Primer on Memory Consistency and Cache
Coherence.(San Rafeal, CA: Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2011.)
[102]Sutherland, I., Sproull, R. F., and Harris, D., Logical Effort: Designing Fast CMOS Circuits.
(New York: Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.)
[103]Sutherland, I. E., Micropipelines. Communications of the ACM 32 (June 1989), 720–738.
[104]Sutherland, I. E. and Sproull, R. F., Logical effort: designing for speed on the back of an
envelope. In Séquin, C. H. (ed.), Proceedings of the 1991 University of California/Santa Cruz
Conference on Advanced Research in VLSI, University of California, Berkeley (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1991), pp. 1–16.
[105]Swade, D., The construction of Charles Babbage’s Difference Engine no. 2. IEEE Annals of
the History of Computing 27: 3 (July–September 2005), 70–88.

--- Page 901 ---
[106]Texas Instruments, The TTL Data Book for Design Engineers, 1st edn. (Dallas, TX: Texas
Instruments, 1973.)
[107]Tredennick, N., Microprocessor Logic Design: The Flowchart Method. (Bedford, MA: Digital
Press, 1987.)
[108]Unger, S. H., TheEssenceofLogicCircuits, 2nd edn. (New York: Wiley–IEEE Press, 1996.)
[109]Veitch, E. W., A chart method for simplifying truth functions. In Proceedings of the 1952
ACM National Meeting, Pittsburgh, May 2–3, 1952. (New York: ACM, 1952), pp. 127–133.
[110] Wallace, C. S., A suggestion for a fast multiplier. IEEE Transactions on Electronic Computers
EC-13: 1 (February 1964), 14–17.
[111] Weinberger, A. and Smith, J. L., A one-microsecond adder using one-megacycle circuitry. IRE
Transactions on Electronic Computers EC-5: 2 (June 1956), 65–73.
[112] Weste, N. and Harris, D., CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective, 4th edn.
(Boston, MA: Addison Wesley, 2010.)
[113] Wilkes, M. V. and Stringer, J. B., Micro-programming and the design of the control circuits in
an electronic digital computer. Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society 49: 02 (1953), 230–238.
[114] Wittenbrink, C., Kilgariff, E., and Prabhu, A., Fermi GF100, a graphics processing unit (GPU)
architecture for compute, tessellation, physics, and computational graphics. In Proceedings of
Hot Chips 22, August 22–24, 2010 (http://hotchips.org/archives/hot-chips-22).
[115] Yau, S. and Tang, Y.-S., An efficient algorithm for generating complete test sets for
combinational logic circuits. IEEE Transactions on Computers C-20: 11 (November 1971),
1245–1251.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 902 ---
INDEX OF VHDL DESIGN ENTITIES
Add and subtract
Behavioral, 235
Structural, 235
Adder
Floating-point, 264
Adders
6-input, 285
Behavioral, 229
Carry look-ahead, 272
CLA, modules for radix-4, 275
CLA, radix-4, 274
Full adder, 227
Ripple-carry, 229
Arbiter
Concurrent signal assignment implementation, 177
Combination lock
Control, 370
Datapath, 369
Complex, fixed-point multiplier, 292
Counter
By 3, 351
Incrementing
Datapath, 346
State table, 345
UDL
Multiplexer implementation, 349
Shared adder, 348
Two adder, 347
D flip-flop, 319
Decoder, 159
4 to 16, 163
Divide-by-three FSM, 433
Divider, 243
Encoder
16:4, 174
Case implementation, 172

--- Page 903 ---
Concurrent signal assignment implementation, 171
Thermometer, 175
Equality comparator
Three-way, 183
FIFO synchronizer, 601
FIR filter, 299
Gray-code counter
3-bit, 602
4-bit, 596
Huffman decoder, 446
Huffman encoder, 443
Interconnect
Bus, 523
Crossbar, 2x2, 526
Light flasher
1x Factor
Master, 379
Timer, 380
2x Factor
Counter, 384
Master, 383
Magnitude comparator
Behavioral, 183
Iterative, 182
Majority function, 52
Test script, 53
Microcode FSM
Branch and store, 415, 416
ROM and sequencer, 407
ROM only, 399
Multiple-of-3
Bit cell, 200
Testbench, 202
Top level, 201
Multiplexer
Binary with case, 168
Binary with decoder, 167
Binary with select, 168
Case implementation, 165
Concurrent signal assignment implementation, 164
Select implementation, 166
Multiplier

--- Page 904 ---
Booth recoder, 280
Booth top level, 279
Floating-point, 261
Unsigned 4-bit, 240
Pipeline register
Double buffer, 509
Prime plus one
Case implementation, 130
Concurrent signal assignment implementation, 137
Conditional signal assignment, 138
Decimal with don’t cares, 142
Decimal, synthesized, 142
Decoder implementation, 162
If implementation, 136
Matching case implementation, 135
Multiplexer implementation, 170
Selected signal assignment, 138
Structural, 139
Synthesized, 133
Testbench, 144
Testbench, go/no-go, 146
Priority arbiter, 205
Programmable, 180
Priority encoder
Arbiter and encoder, 179
Behavioral implementation, 179
Processor
1 of 2, 422
2 of 2, 423
ALU, 421
RAM, 192
Representation converter
Fixed to floating-point, 296
Floating to fixed-point, 297
ROM
Array implementation, 188
Case implementation, 187
Seven-segment decoder
Case implementation, 150
Constant definitions, 149
Inverse, 151
Shift register
LRL, 354
LSB only, 352
Variable, 356

--- Page 905 ---
Shifter
Barrel, 184
Left, 184
Thermometer detector
Case implementation, 134
Concurrent signal assignment implementation, 137
Matching case implementation, 135
Structural implementation, 141
Testbench, 147
Thermostat, 14
Tic-Tac-Toe, combinational
Empty, 211
Select 3, 212
Testbench, 213
Top level, 209
Two-in-array, 210
Two-in-row, 211
Tic-Tac-Toe, sequential, 440
Timer, 350
Tomorrow
Days in month, 203
Next day of week, 203
Top level, 204
Traffic-light controller
Factored
Combiner, 390
Light FSM, 391
Master, 389
Simple
Definitions, 318
Definitions, one-hot, 318
FSM, 317
Test bench, 320
Universal shifter/counter, 355
Vending machine
Combined, 366
Controller, 1 of 2, 361
Controller, 2 of 2, 362
Datapath, 363
Testbench, 364
Top level, 360
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 906 ---
SUBJECT INDEX
⊕ , 49
∨ , 43
∧ , 43
1’s complement, 231
2’s complement, 231
Absolute error, 250
Absorption property, 44
Accelerated life test, 461
Accuracy, numerical, 251
Activity factor, 99
Adder
Carry look-ahead, 269
Pipelined, 502
Ripple-carry, 228
Addition, 224
Fixed-point, 255
Floating-point, 260
Address space, 541
Alignment, floating-point, 260
Allocator
Crossbar, 525
AND, 43
Schematic, 49
Switch circuit, 58
VHDL, 51
Annihilation axiom, 43
AOI, 72
CMOS gate, 72
Logical effort, 89
Sizing, 89
Arbiter, 173
Bus, 522
Look-ahead, 271
Architecture body, 14
Arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 425
ASIC, 28
Associative property, 44

--- Page 907 ---
Barrel shifter, 183
Behavioral VHDL, 132
Binary numbers, 221
Binary point, 252
Binary signal, 4
Binary-coded decimal numbers, 222
Boolean algebra, 43
Axioms, 43
Properties, 44
Booth recoding, 276
Radix-16, 278
Radix-4, 276
Radix-8, 278
Bottleneck, 511
Boundary scan, 459
Branch
Multi-way, 408
Two-way, 404
Broadcast
Bus, 523
Bubble rule, 70
Buffer, 6
Bug tracking, 456
Built-in self-test, 459
Bus, 522
Arbiter, 522
Multiple destinations, 523
Split transaction, 524
Bus notation, 157
Cache, 540
Direct-mapped, 542
Eviction, 542
Fully-associative, 542
Line size, 541
Write policy, 543
CAD tools, 32
CAM, 542
Capacitance, gate, 65
Carry look-ahead, see Look-ahead
Change control, 24
Channels, 527
Checking models, 153
Circuit boards, 31
Clock, 307
Clock domain, 592
Clock gating, 99
CMOS gate, 69

--- Page 908 ---
Color, subtractive representation of, 11
Combination lock, 367
Combinational logic
Composition, 106
Definition, 105
Combining property, 44
Commutative property, 44
Comparator, 12, 180
Complementation property, 44
Composition of subsystems, 12
Compressor, 283
Concatenation operator (&)., 171
Concept development, 24
Condition operator ??, 200, 631
Consensus, 44
Constraint file, 195
Static timing, 338
Contamination delay, 328
Counter, 344
UDL, 346
Cover, logic function, 115
Coverage, 453
Critical path, 91
Crossbar, 524
Allocator, 525
Cube, representation, see Logic representations
Data sheet, 193
Datapath, 344
Vending machine, 360
Day of year, representing, 10
Decimal numbers, 221
Decoder, 157
SRAM, row, 533
Use in logic implementation, 161
Delay
Contamination, 328
Gate, 82
Large load, 85
Logic chain, 89
Optimizing, 92
Propagation, 328
Wire, repeated, 96
Wire, unbuffered, 95
With fan-out, 85
DeMorgan’s theorem, 44
Denormalized numbers, 258
DES cracker

--- Page 909 ---
Partitioning, 475
Specification, 471
Timing, 489
Design entity, 14, 51
Design process
CAD tool flow, 32
General, 22
System, 467
Dimension-order routing, 527
Direct instantiation, 143
Directed test, 455
Distributive property, 44
Divide by three FSM, 431
Divide-and-conquer, 207
Division, 240
Double buffering, 507
Drain, 64
DRAM, 534
Access scheduling, 540
Access sequence, 534
Atom, 536
Interface, 534
Precharge, 535
Timing, 535
Dual function, 46
Earle latch, 567
Encoder, 171
Encoding
Binary-weighted, 10
Gray, 20
Thermometer, 10
Energy dissipation, 98
Entity declaration, 14
EPROM, 189
Equality comparison, 180
Error, numerical
Absolute, 250
Relative, 251
Escape pattern, 31
Event flow, 488
Exclusive OR, 51
Exhaustive test, 454
Exponent, 257
Fan-in, 86
Fanout, 85
Fault model, 456

--- Page 910 ---
Feasibility study, 26
FIFO, 596
Find first one (FF1), see Arbiter
Finite State Machine (FSM), 307
Factoring, 375
Implementation, 313
VHDL, 316
Fixed-function logic, 16
Fixed-point numbers, 252
Flip-flop
CMOS, 572
Contamination delay, 331
D, 307, 331
Derivation, 574
Hold time, 331
Implementation, 568
Propagation delay, 331
Pulsed, 578
RS, 306, 553
Setup time, 331
Flits, 529
Floating-point, 257
Flow control, 386, 481
Flow table, 552
FO4, 85
Formal verification, 455
FPGA, 29
Front end, analog, 16
Full adder, 224
Fundamental mode, 553
Funnel shifter, 183
Generate signal, 225
Look-ahead, 269
Gradual underflow, 259
Grant matrix, 525
Gray-code, 596
Grid, 30
Half adder, 224
Hardware, 16
Hazards, combinational, 121
Dynamic, 122
Static-0, 121
Static-1, 121
Head-of-line blocking, 539
Hexadecimal, base-16, 222
High impedance, 75

--- Page 911 ---
Hold time
Calculating, 568, 570
Flip-flop, 331
Latch, 566, 571
SRAM, 533
Hold-time violations, 331
Homing sequence, 325
Huffman decoder, 442
Huffman encoder, 440
Idempotence property, 44
Identity axiom, 43
Idioms of digital design, 195
Illegal state, 580
Probability of entry, 584
Implementation coverage, 454
Implicant of a logic function, 110
Implied one, 257, 267
Instantiation, design entity, 130
Instruction types, 410
Branch, 404
Store, 410
Intellectual property, 195
Interconnect, 521
Bus, see Bus
Crossbar, see Crossbar
Networks, 527
Interface
Always-valid, 479
Isochronous, 486
Packetized, 483
Partitioning, 482
Periodically valid, 480
Pull timing, 481
Push timing, 481
Ready–valid, 481
Serial, 483
Static, 479
Inversion bubble, 49
Inverter, see NOT
Iterative circuit, 175
JTAG, 459
Karnaugh map, 113
Asynchronous, 555
Latch, 566

--- Page 912 ---
Derivation, 572
Tri-state, 571
Latency, 497
Length, gate, 63
Light flasher, 375
Load balance, 511
Locality, 541
Logic diagram, 48
Logic representations
Cube, 110
Incomplete, 117
Karnaugh map, 113
Normal form, 47, 109
Sum of products, 47
Logical effort, 87
Look-ahead, 176, 269
LSB, 222
Magnitude comparator, 181
Look-ahead, 271
Majority function, 45
CMOS gate, 72
Schematic, 49
Switch network, 60
VHDL, 51
Mantissa, 257
Master FSM, 376
Master–slave FSMs, 386
Master–slave partitioning, 474
Maxterm, 119
Mealy state machine, 311
Memory
Bank conflicts, 540
Banked, 536
Bit-sliced, 536
Hierarchy, 540
Interleaved, 537
Primitive, 532
Metastability, 581
Convergence, 583
Demonstration, 585
Microcoded FSM, 398
Microinstruction, 400
Minimum cycle time, 332
Minterm, 47, 109
Model-view-controller partitioning, 474
Monotonic functions, 69
Moore state machine, 311

--- Page 913 ---
Moore’s law, 34
MOS transistor
Current, 66
Electrical model, 65
Operation, 63
Speed, 67
Switch model, 62
MSB, 222
Multicast
Bus, 523
Multiple-of-3 circuit, 199
Multiplexer, 163
Binary-select, 166
Function implementation with, 170
SRAM, column, 533
Tri-state, 76, 163
Multiplication, 237
Booth recoding, 276
Complex numbers, 290
Fixed-point, 255
Floating-point, 259
Wallace tree, 278
Music player
Partitioning, 475
Specification, 472
Timing, 493
NAND, 50
CMOS gate, 70
Logical effort, 87
Schematic, 50
Sizing, 87
Negation axiom, 43
Nested timing, 483
NFET, 63
Noise, 5
Accumulation, 6
Analog, 6
Restoration, 6
Noise margin, 7
NOR, 50
CMOS gate, 70
Logical effort, 88
Schematic, 50
Sizing, 88
Normal form, see Logic representations
Normalization, 257
NOT, 43

--- Page 914 ---
CMOS gate, 70
Delay, 82
Energy, 98
Power, 99
Schematic, 49
Sizing, 83
Transfer curve, 66
VHDL, 51
One-hot code, 157
One-hot decoder, 157
Opcode, 408
OR, 43
Schematic, 49
Switch circuit, 59
VHDL, 51
Oscillation, asynchronous, 553
Overflow, 230
2’s complement, 232, 233
Package, 14
Package declaration, 149
Packet, 521
Packetization, 484
Parasitic capacitance, 93
Partial product, 237
Partitioning
Control and data, 356
System, 473
Pass/fail simulation, 147
Patch, microcode, 398
Perfect induction, 44
PFET, 63
Pipeline, 386, 497
Adder, 502
Double buffered, 507
Examples, 500
FIFO buffering, 512
Stalls, 505
Pipeline partitioning, 474
PLA (programmable logic array), 192
Pong
Partitioning, 474
Specification, 468
Timing, 489
Port
SRAM, 533
Power

--- Page 915 ---
Dynamic, 99
Scaling, 100
Static, 99
Power gating, 99
Precision, numerical, 251
Predecoder, 160
Prime implicant, 111
Essential, 112
Priority arbiter, 205
Priority encoder, 177
Processor, 16, 420
Product implementation plan, 26
Product-of-sums
implementation, 119
Program counter, 404
PROM, 189
Propagate signal, 225
Look-ahead, 269
Propagation delay, 328
SRAM, 533
Pulldown network, 69
Pullup network, 70
Qualified expression, 347
Quantized representation, 9
Race, asynchronous, 551, 558
Critical, 558
RAM (random access memory), 189
Random test, 455
Range
Fixed-point, 253
Floating-point, 258
Register, 313
Regression testing, 27
Relative error, 251
Repeater, 96
Representation function, 250
Resistance, source, 65
Resolution, 251
Fixed-point, 253
Floating-point, 257
Resource partitioning, 474
Risks, 25
ROM (read-only memory), 184
Function implementation with, 185
Rounding, 251
Router, 527

--- Page 916 ---
Scaled numbers, 254
Scaling, transistor, 34
Scan chain, 458
SDDR3, 536
Sensitivity list, 132
Sequencer, microcode, 402
Sequential circuits, 305
Asynchronous, 551
Synchronous, 307
Serialization, 483
Setup time
Calculating, 568, 570
Flip-flop, 331
Latch, 566, 571
SRAM, 533
Setup-time violations, 331
Seven-segment decoder, 126, 148
Inverse, 152
Shift register, 352
Shifters, 183
Shmoo plot, 461
Sign extension, 236
Sign-magnitude numbers, 230
Signal replication, 165
Signaling
Analog, 5
Binary, 4
Multi-bit, 9
Signed numbers, 230
Simulation, VHDL, 33, 143
Sizing, logic gates, 86
Skew, clock, 334
Slack, timing, 333
Slice, 168
Software, 16, 427
SOS detection FSM, 432
Source, 64
Spatial locality, 541
Specification, 22
System, 468
Specification coverage, 453
Speculation, 491
SRAM, 532
Timing, 533
Stable state, 553
Stall, see Pipeline
Standard-cell, 28
State, 306

--- Page 917 ---
State assignment, 312
Binary, 312
One-hot, 312
State diagram, 308
State equivalence, 573
State register, 313
State table, 308
Straw-man specification, 23
Structural VHDL, 132
Stuck-at fault, 456
Subroutines, 414
Subtractor, 234
Subtype, 188
Sum of products, see Logic representations
Switch circuit, 58
Symmetric functions, 72
Synchronization failure, 580
Synchronizer, 592
Brute-force, 593
FIFO, 596
Sequence, 593
State, 593
Synthesis, VHDL, 13, 132
System specification, 468
System timing, 479
Temporal locality, 541
Test patterns, 145
Test plan, 27
Test suite, 453
Test vector, 457
Testbench, 143
Thermometer encoding, see Encoding
Throughput, 497
Tic-Tac-Toe, 207
Sequential, 439
Timer, 349
Timing analysis tools, 337
Timing diagram, 306
Timing table, 487
Timing, interface, see Interface, 479
Toggle circuit, 554
Tomorrow circuit, 201
Topology, interconnect, 527
Total path effort, 92
Tournament arbiter, 205
Traffic-light controller
Factored, 382

--- Page 918 ---
Unfactored, 309
Trajectory map, 555
Transfer curve, DC, 7
Transient state, 553, 555
Transistor, see MOS transistor
Tri-state circuits, 75
Truncation, 251
Truth table, 43, 107
Type conversion, 144
Unit test, 27
Unsigned numbers, 230
Use clause, 14, 54
V0, 4
V1, 4
VIH, 4
VIL, 4
Vmax, 4
Vmin, 4
VNMH, 7
VNML, 7
VOH, 4
VOL, 4
Value function, 250
Vending-machine FSM, 357
Verification, 27, 453
Verilog, 13
VHDL, 13
VHDL “don’t care” value (’-’), 134, 645
VHDL aggregate, 378
VHDL architecture body, 131, 628
VHDL architecture declarative part, 629
VHDL architecture statement part, 629
VHDL array aggregate, 162, 165, 630
VHDL attributes, 638
VHDL bit string literal, 131, 625
VHDL boolean expressions, 51
VHDL case statement, 131, 644
VHDL component declaration, 52, 629
VHDL component instantiation, 132, 634
VHDL compound delimiter
<< (double less than, external name), 321, 362
>> (double greater than, external name), 321, 362
:= (constant initialization), 629
:= (variable assignment), 646
<= (signal assignment), 15, 51, 632

--- Page 919 ---
=> (arrow, inside a case statement), 131, 645
=> (arrow, inside array aggregate), 165, 630
=> (arrow, inside named association), 132, 635
VHDL concurrent signal assignment statement, 632
VHDL concurrent statement, 136
VHDL conditional signal assignment, 138, 632
VHDL configuration declaration, 140
VHDL delimiter
| (choice delimiter), 131, 633
’ (attribute name), 638
’ (qualified expression), 316, 627
. (period, external name), 321, 362
. (period, record element access), 378, 627
: (colon, component instantiation), 132, 634
: (colon, external name), 321, 362
: (colon, port declaration), 131
: (colon, signal declaration), 52
; semicolon, 15, 51
VHDL design entity, 129
VHDL direct instantiation, 635
VHDL entity declaration, 130, 628
VHDL external names, 362
VHDL external path name, 321
VHDL frequently used textbook components
AddSub (add/subtract unit), 234
Arb (fixed priority arbiter), 176
Dec (n to m decoder), 158
EqComp (equality comparator), 181
FullAdder (full adder), 226
MagComp (magnitude comparator), 182
Mux3 (3 → 1 one-hot select multiplexer), 164
Muxb3 (3 → 1 binary-select multiplexer), 166
RAM (read-write memory), 191
RArb (reversed fixed priority arbiter), 176
ROM (read-only memory), 187
sDFF (flip-flop, single-bit), 318
vDFF (flip-flop, multi-bit), 318
vDFFE (flip-flop with enable, multi-bit), 414
VHDL generic constant, 158
VHDL if statement, 136
VHDL index range, 625
VHDL integer type, 145, 624
VHDL keywords
all (sensitivity list), 643
all (use clause), 14
and, 51
architecture, 14, 15, 628, 629
array, 188, 626

--- Page 920 ---
attribute, 189, 638
begin (architecture body), 15, 52, 629
begin (process statement), 646
buffer, 131, 628, 647
case, 131, 644
case?, 134, 644
component, 52, 53, 139, 149, 629
configuration (component instantiation), 147, 634
configuration (configuration declaration), 140
constant, 149, 629
downto, 15, 625
else, 14, 15, 138, 632
elsif, 136, 644
end, 14
entity, 14, 52, 130, 628, 634
file, 188
for, 53, 188
function, 188
generic (generic parameter), 158, 628, 629
generic map (component instantiation), 159, 634
if, 136, 644
impure, 188
in, 14, 131, 628
inout, 131, 628
is, 14, 52, 130, 131, 628
library, 14, 627
loop, 53
map, 53, 634
mod, 200
not, 51
of, 14, 628
or, 51
others (use in aggregate), 165
others (use in case statement), 131, 645
others (use in selected signal assignment), 137, 633
out, 15, 131, 628
package, 149
port, 14, 130, 628, 629
port map, 53, 132, 634
process, 52, 53, 130, 132, 642
record, 378, 627
report, 53, 144, 145
return, 188
select, 137, 138, 633
signal, 52, 629
sll (shift left logical), 159
srl (shift right logical), 159
subtype, 150, 188

--- Page 921 ---
then, 136, 644
to, 53, 625
type, 188
use, 14, 627
variable, 188, 646, 647
wait, 53
when (case statement), 131, 644
when (conditional signal assignment), 15, 632
when (selected signal assignment), 137, 633
with, 137, 138, 633
xor, 51
VHDL matching case statement, 134, 644
VHDL named association, 132, 635
VHDL operators, 631
+ (add), 228, 630
- (subtract), 234, 630
> (greater than), 14
?? (condition operator), 200, 631
** (exponentiation), 630
* (multiplication), 630
/= (inequality), 147, 630
/ (division), 630
& (concatenation), 145, 630
not, 630
and, 51
mod (modulo), 200
not, 51
or, 51
xor, 51
VHDL positional association, 132, 635
VHDL predefined attributes, 638
VHDL qualified expression, 316, 627
VHDL record type, 617, 626
VHDL resolution function, 636
VHDL selected signal assignment, 137, 633
VHDL sensitivity list, 143, 641
VHDL signal declaration, 52, 629
VHDL slice, 162, 629
VHDL standard functions
conv_std_logic_vector, 351
falling_edge, 652
or_reduce, 173
rising_edge, 320, 647, 652
shift_left, 159
shift_right, 236
std.env.stop, 54, 144, 321
to_hstring, 145
to_integer, 144, 188

--- Page 922 ---
to_ostring, 145
to_string, 53, 144, 145
to_unsigned, 144
VHDL standard libraries
ieee.numeric_std, 144
ieee.std_logic_1164, 14
ieee.std_logic_textio, 188
ieee.std_logic_unsigned, 53
std.env, 320
std.textio, 188
work, 143
VHDL standard types
boolean, 624
enumeration, 626
integer, 624
record, 378
std_logic, 14, 51, 624
std_logic_vector, 14, 625
VHDL structural description, 138, 634
VHDL variable, 646
VHDL pragma translate_off, 52
Virtual channels, 529
Wallace tree, 278
Weighted number representation, 221
Width, gate, 63
Wires, 94
Write buffer, 544
X
Input, 110
Output, 117
XNOR, 180
XOR, 49
CMOS gate, 73
Schematic, 49
Switch circuit, 61
z state, 75
OceanofPDF.com