--- Page 2 ---
Shantanu Baruah and Shaurya Baruah
App Development Using iOS iCloud
Incorporating CloudKit with Swift in
Xcode


--- Page 3 ---
Shantanu Baruah
Somerset, NJ, USA
Shaurya Baruah
Somerset, NJ, USA
ISBN 978-1-4842-8757-6 e-ISBN 978-1-4842-8758-3
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3
© Shantanu Baruah and Shaurya Baruah 2023
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and
exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of
translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other
physical way, and transmission or information storage and
retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by
similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter
developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names,
trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not
imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such
names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and
regulations and therefore free for general use.

--- Page 4 ---
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume
that the advice and information in this book are believed to be
true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the
publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty,
expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Apress imprint is published by the registered company
APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.
The registered company address is: 1 New York Plaza, New
York, NY 10004, U.S.A.

--- Page 5 ---
For my parents and my son’s grandparents, Meenu Baruah and
Late Sailendar Nath Baruah

--- Page 6 ---
Introduction
Over the last decade, the usage of iPhones has skyrocketed.
Apple released their first iPhone back in the summer of 2007.
What started off as a small idea, a handheld computer used to
call and message people, has become the new normal.
Practically everyone carries a phone in their back-pocket. The
first smartphone, released in 1994, had just ten inbuilt Apps,
including Address Book, Calculator, Calendar, Mail, Notepad,
and Sketch Pad, among a few others. If you have an iPhone, you
will probably realize that you still have all these Apps. They
have been around for over two decades! The only difference
today is that we have an App store, where we can download
about 2.2 million other Apps, if we so desire. This is a big jump
from the original ten.
Here is a scenario. You wake up one morning, pull out your
iPhone, and suddenly have an idea for a brilliant App,
something humanity has never seen before. However, you don’t
know how to code, or where to even start. If you have navigated
your way to this book, you are probably in a similar
predicament. This book shouldn’t scare you. It is not a
dictionary filled with every single line of code that has ever
existed. Rather, it is a step-by-step guide, which will help you
with everything you need to know for creating a professionally
appealing App, even if you are just a beginner who has never
written a line of code in your life.
The first part of the book will teach you the basics of coding
as you will build the initial version of your sample App (read
the next section to learn more about the App we will build). The
second part of the book delves deeper into exploring all

--- Page 7 ---
additional features that the Apple ecosystem offers, and we will
create the professional version of the sample App.
If that sounds intimidating, there is no reason to worry
because this book is designed to take you on a journey of
learning; it is not a reference book for all syntax and concepts.
Some concepts may take multiple sittings – even a few days.
The answer sometimes could be right in front of you the entire
time. Demonstrate patience. Read at your own pace, build along
as you move from chapter to chapter, use the book as a
reference, and if code doesn’t compile or the concept becomes
overwhelming, then take a break and revisit the topic. You will
be surprised how easy the same concept will appear when you
look at it the next time around with a fresh mind.
This book breaks everything down in a simple way and will
guide you toward the right path in deciphering the complexities
of building your App. In the end, if you still need help, send us
an email (shantanu.baruah@gmail.com), and we will try
to get back to you as soon as possible.
Thank you for reading. Enjoy your journey through the
world of programming.

--- Page 8 ---
About the Book Tracker App
The book is designed to teach you a new concept as you
progress through building the Book Tracker application. You
will first learn the new idea, and then implement it into your
very own App. As you read through this book, you will slowly
make your very own iPhone application. Let us first understand
what App we will build.
Have you ever forgotten the book you just read last week?
Do you want a reliable way to make sure you’re reading
consistently? Do you feel like taking electronic notes, scanning
portions of text for reference purposes? How about creating a
good reading list and sharing with your friends? The Book
Tracker App will allow you to perform all such functions and
many more. The App allows you to create a new book and give
it additional details (such as author name, genre, etc.). You can
search for a book, take book notes, and share your reading list
with friends. If you want to change some of the details in your
book, you can do that very easily with the Update Feature. You
can also delete a book whenever you like. In summary, the book
tracker App will have the following functions:
Ability to add, update, and delete books
Functionality to view book details
Define book genre
Classify book views by criteria such as a book currently read,
already read, or to be read
Search books by book and author names
Share books with other readers
Set reminders
Take exhaustive notes on any book in the library

--- Page 9 ---
Mark a book as Favorite and view all favorite books in one
place
We will also learn about design concepts to create
professional-looking Apps. We will exhaustively leverage iCloud
CloudKit APIs to persist data in private secure databases. To
create this App, we will use the language Swift and the Xcode
IDE.
A screenshot of the Book Tracker App is shown here:

--- Page 10 ---
Parts of the Book
The book is divided into two parts.
Part I – Basic App Building

--- Page 11 ---
In this part, users will get familiarized with Xcode and CloudKit
(the cloud-based database). This part will help users to create a
basic Book Tracker App. The primary intent is to get you
accustomed to the basics of building an iPhone Application. The
part also focuses on designing Application UI using code
(instead of Apple providing drag and drop interface) and
applying constraints for multiform display. For complex iPhone
App development, we recommend code-based UI creation and
constraint management, and though this is an advanced
concept, we are introducing this in Part I. At the end of Part I,
we will have a basic functioning App.
This part also provides details on some core Swift language
concepts. This is a separate section for reference purposes only
in case details around a core concept need a revisit.
Part II – Advance App
This part teaches all the advanced concepts required to build
any professional looking App in the App Store. The following
concepts will be covered in this part:
Enhancing the Book Tracker App – Robust functionality,
enhanced UI, and better usability
Multiuser Mode – iCloud Database concepts for sharing data
across users with the right security setup
Integration to iPhone native features – Siri, Notification
Center
Introduction to Test Flight – How to make a beta release
before posting the App for review to the App Store, and
subsequently, how to submit the App to the App Store
Our Goal and Final Words

--- Page 12 ---
The goal of this book is to spread new ideas and to share our
knowledge with the world. Before writing this book, we worked
together on creating an iPhone App called Tracking Genie (it is
available in the Apple Store). While working on this project, we
faced multiple issues with CloudKit, as there is lack of
documentation available on this topic. This book will share
everything we learned along the way while making this App
from scratch. It will teach you everything you need to know in
building iPhone App CloudKit. If you are planning to create a
native iOS application, this book should help make that journey
enriching and enjoyable.
The code is compatible with the latest iOS 15.0 version and
is built using Swift language in Xcode 13.3.1.

--- Page 13 ---
Any source code or other supplementary material referenced
by the author in this book is available to readers on the Github
repository: https://github.com/Apress/App-Development-
Using-iOS-iCloud. For more detailed information, please visit
http://www.apress.com/source-code.

--- Page 14 ---
Acknowledgments
Writing a book on technology is quite a time-consuming task,
for it is not about writing your thoughts on paper but also
writing code and validating its completeness. I would like to
thank my wife Kapila Sood and my daughter Nitara Baruah for
their undeterred support and patience as I put together endless
hours to bring this book to life. Their feedback on the aesthetics
of the App, which is an integral part of the book, and the outline
of the book content is invaluable.
I would also like to thank my mother Meenu Baruah who
discovered the writing itch in me quite early in my life and has
always encouraged me to pursue writing. While at times I
remained uncertain, she never doubted that one day I will be a
published author. She is also the first published author in our
family, and I am certain I got my writing genes from her. I would
also like to thank my father, Late Sailender Nath Baruah, who
introduced me to the world of software back in the day when
computers were not ubiquitously available.
I cannot thank enough my Apress team for all their help in
making this book a reality. Aaron Black, who I pitched the book
to, loved the idea instantly and introduced me to the world of
publishing. Susan McDermott, for all the coaching and help in
navigating through the publishing process; Shonmirin, in
helping with all coordination; Vishwesh Ravi Shrimali and
James Markham, for reviewing my code and making sure it
works as expected and for providing valuable comments in
reorganizing the chapters and content.
—Shantanu Baruah

--- Page 15 ---
I am extremely thankful to my father, Shantanu Baruah, for
introducing me to the world of programming. He was always
enthusiastic about teaching me programming, ever since my
early days. At first, I questioned why he would push me to work
hard when I was only an early middle schooler, but now, as I
look back, I realize how much his help supported me in
excelling in not only learning this subject but also having the
great fortune to author a book along with him.
I would also like to thank my mother, Kapila Sood, for all her
help in assisting me on this project.
I am also thankful to Ms. Joy Wolfe, who taught me
computer science in high school for the last two years. She has
helped me expand my knowledge to a variety of computer
science languages, which has helped me immensely in writing
this book.
Finally, I want to thank the Apress team for their help and
support in making this book a reality.
—Shaurya Baruah

--- Page 16 ---
Table of Contents
Part I: Basic App Development Using Swift Core Concepts
Chapter 1:  Xcode Introduction
About Xcode
Installation and System Requirements
Interface Introduction
Chapter Summary
Chapter 2:  CloudKit Overview
CloudKit at a Glance
Setting Up CloudKit
Exploring CloudKit Dashboard
Accessing the iCloud Dashboard
Understanding the Dashboard
Creating Book Tracker Table (Table, type, Indexes)
Summary
Chapter 3:  Core Swift Concepts
Variables
Let and Var
Basic Types
Classes, Structures, and Objects
Array
Scope

--- Page 17 ---
Functions
Beautifying Strings Using NSAttributedStri ng
Life Cycle Methods
Type Casting
Loop Controls
UI Color
Overview
Guidelines for UI Color
System Colors
Dynamic System Colors
Getting System Colors
Syntax
UIImage and UIImageView
UITextField
UIAlertControlle r
UITableView
Summary
Chapter 4:  Book Tracker Basic App Building
Setting Up the Tab View Controller
Creating a Tab Application
Summary
Chapter 5:  Adding Book Screen

--- Page 18 ---
Designing the Add Screen
Assigning the Add View Controller File in Main. 
storyboard
Running the Code
Defining the UI Objects for the Add Screen
Running the Program
Saving the Book Record in iCloud
Data Validation Is an Important Step
Create a Database Function File
Preparation Before Saving the Book
Function to Save Book Record
Setting Value Before Calling saveBook
Post Save
Reset Field
Summary
Chapter 6:  Displaying the Book Records
Setting Up Display View Controller
Assigning the Display View Controller File in Main. 
storyboard
Query the Book Table
Call the Query Book
Create a Table View
Step 1:  Define the Table Object

--- Page 19 ---
Step 2:  Extending the Table Delegate and Table Data
Source
Step 3:  Setting the Table Delegate and Table Cell
Step 4:  Drawing the Table
Step 5:  Implementing numberOfRowsInSe ction
Step 6:  Implementing the cellForRowAt
Step 6:  Run the program
Detailed Text Label
Setting a Table Header
Summary
Chapter 7:  Deleting a Table Record
Trailing Swipe Function
Deleting book from CloudKit Database
Summary
Chapter 8:  Searching Data Screen
Create the Search View Controller
Draw the Search Screen
Query for All Records to Enable Search
Text Field Events, Operations, and Display
Remove Constraints
Table Functions
Summary
Chapter 9:  App Development Part 2 Overview

--- Page 20 ---
What Lies Ahead .  .  . 
iCloud Setup
Summary
Part II: Overview
Chapter 10:  Redesigning the Display Screen
Redesigning the UI of the Display Book Screen
Initial Setup
Defining UI Objects for the Top Views
Lifecycle Method and Initial Setup
Drawing the Screen
Table Setup
Top View Blocks
Custom Delegation
Define the Delegate Protocol
Implementing the Delegate
Calling the Delegate
Summary
Chapter 11:  Adding a Book
Creation of View Controller and Linking It to the Tab
Bar
Inheriting Delegates
Declaring Variables
Declaring Screen Objects

--- Page 21 ---
Screen Load Event and Initial Functions
Displaying the Genre and Status Table
Input Text Field Events
Save the Book
Saving Book Record to iCloud
Reset Fields
Summary
Chapter 12:  Book Details View Controller
Initial Setup
Create the View Controller
Class Inheritance
Class Variables
Initial Load Functions
Setup
Set Book Details
Drawing the Screen
Screen Objects
UI Object Code Snippets
UI Object Code Snippets
UI Object Code Snippets
UI Object Code Snippets
Drawing Screen

--- Page 22 ---
Displaying the Book Details
Number of Sections
Number of Rows
Display the Table
Row Height
Header View
Header Height
Defining the Custom Cell
Tab Bar Function
Summary
Chapter 13:  Sharing Book with Other Users
Import CloudKit
Share Button Click Event
Share Record Functions
Cloud Sharing Call Back Function
Summary
Chapter 14:  Edit Book
Calling the Edit View Controller
Edit View Controller
Class Level Variable
Navigation Bar
Setup

--- Page 23 ---
Save Book
Update Book Database Functions
Summary
Chapter 15:  Book Delete
Delete Block Button Action
Custom Delete Book Function
Delete Book Database Function
Summary
Chapter 16:  Book Notes
Marking Book as FavoriteBook Notes Touch Up Inside
Event
Book Notes View Controller
Class Level Variables
Book Notes Variable
Class Level UI Objects
Initial Loading
Custom Table View Cell for Book Notes
Draw the Notes Screen
Table View Function
Table View Trailing Swipe Control
Delete Notes
Adding Notes
Draw the Add Notes Popup

--- Page 24 ---
Add Notes Navigation Bar Function
Remove Constraints
Save Book Method
Database Save Book Method
Tab Bar Function
Summary
Chapter 17:  Book Reminder
Reminder Action Button
Draw Reminder Screen
Save Reminder
Setup Reminder
Reset Reminder
Update Reminder
Update Database with Reminder Date
Remove Reminder Screen
Summary
Chapter 18:  Mark Favorite
Frequency Button Action
Database Functions Update Favorite Status
Animation Function
Summary
Chapter 19:  Shared Books Tab

--- Page 25 ---
Accept the Share Record:  Scene Delegate
Share Record Function
Shared Book Database Function
Shared Task Zones
Query Functions
Summary
Chapter 20:  Search Screen
Create the View Controller
Class Variables
Class UI Objects
Screen Setup
View Did Load
Book Query function
Database Function for Book Query
Setup
Draw Search Screen
Text Field Function
Editing Begin
Editing Changed
Editing End
Pressing the Return Key on Keyboard
Drawing the Table

--- Page 26 ---
Removing the Constraints
Table Function
Summary
Chapter 21:  Packaging and Releasing
Setting Up the Application Logo
Build the Archive and Publish
Set Up Test Flight Account
Menu Option
Distribute App
Setting Up the App in App Store
Promote Development Database to Production
Database
Invite Test Users in Test Flight
Test-Driven Development
Summary
Index

--- Page 27 ---
About the Authors
Shantanu Baruah
is an Executive Vice President
leading new business acquisition
in the Life Sciences and
Healthcare business at HCL
Technologies. With over 21+
years of experience across
multiple disciplines, Shantanu
has been a pioneer in the fields
of healthcare, life sciences, and
digital and information
technology at HCL Technologies.
His leadership has guided
delivery, practice building, and
development of market-leading
solutions to reach new heights. A
leader with global exposure, Shantanu has successfully led
teams across India, Singapore, France, and the United States.
His technological expertise and innovative leadership qualities
have placed him at the forefront of important business
acquisitions. Shantanu is active in the App development
community and has an approved App on Apple App Store. He
has been recognized as one of the top 25 Healthcare IT
Executives of 2020 by the IT Services Report. He is also
recognized as one of the Top 50 Healthcare Leaders in
Consulting by The Consulting Report Magazine in August 2022.
Shantanu lives in New Jersey. His philanthropic outreach
includes education for children in developing nations.

--- Page 28 ---
 
Shaurya Baruah
is a high school student of the
class of 2024, who attends The
Peddie School, an elite boarding
school located in New Jersey. He
has a strong interest in Math,
Physics, & Computer Science.
Some of his relevant coursework
include AP (college-level)
Computer Science A, Calculus BC,
Physics C, English Literature, and
Statistics. Shaurya is dedicated to
giving back to his community, as
he founded a 501(c)(3)
nonprofit, Academic Advancements, with the mission to
support the education of underprivileged students globally
through means of financial aid and tutoring. Shaurya also
participates in a variety of extracurricular activities, including
Varsity Wrestling and Public Forum Debate.
 

--- Page 29 ---
About the Technical Reviewer
Vishwesh Ravi Shrimali
completed his bachelor’s in
mechanical engineering and
master’s in machine learning and
artificial intelligence. Currently,
he is working at Mercedes Benz
Research and Development as an
ADAS Engineer. He has also
coauthored Machine Learning for
OpenCV 4 (Second Edition),
Computer Vision Workshop, and
Data Science for Marketing
Analytics (Second Edition) by
Packt. When he is not writing
blogs or working on projects, he
likes to go on long walks or play his acoustic guitar.
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 30 ---
Part I
Basic App Development Using Swift
Core Concepts
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 31 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of
Springer Nature 2023
S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloud
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_1
1. Xcode Introduction
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
In this chapter, you will learn about the platform we will use to
write our code. If you already have downloaded Xcode, and
have a good understanding of the system, feel free to skip this
chapter and head to Chapter 3 to learn about CloudKit.


--- Page 32 ---
Figure 1-1. App Store Xcode Download Screen
Figure 1-2 Xcode Launch Screen

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 1-3 App Settings
About Xcode
For beginners, you will probably have no idea what Xcode is. No
need to worry, read through this short chapter, and you will be
well versed with the necessary Xcode concepts.
Apple has developed Xcode as its IDE platform for macOS
users to create native applications for all Apple devices. It was
first released in 2003, and since then, it has received many
updates. The latest edition is version 13.3.1 (as of September
2021). It is a free download from the Mac App Store; however,
for a developer license, you need to pay around 100 dollars a
year.
Although it may seem daunting at first, when you get used
to programming and the interface, Xcode is a brilliant platform

--- Page 34 ---
for coding. There are a few reasons why I fell in love with this
IDE.
First, the auto-completion feature of Xcode is a great little
tool which will come in quite handy in writing your code. When
you type any character or phrase, a list of all the suggested
functions pops up, so it’s easy to find functions, their definition,
and related elements, particularly helpful if you are new to the
syntax. Because of this feature, you don’t have to spend a ton of
time looking for help content. You can simply type something
like the name of the function and try finding it using the auto-
complete feature.
I would also like to mention Playground, which is a great
feature often overlooked. Use Playground to test out different
codes and for learning the basics of programming. Playground
also will give you instant results; the program is always
running, so you can see the results of your code in the console.
There’s no need to click any button or refresh the project. This
way, you don’t waste a lot of your time worrying about code
structure at an early stage of learning. It is a great way to train,
learn new concepts, and get better at programming.
Apps which span across devices (iPhone, iPad, and iOS) and
use multiple form factors often will demand their screen to be
designed using code. However, Xcode also has a Storyboard,
where you can easily drag and drop to create your own screen.
This feature works fine for a simple-looking screen. We will
start by making the screen with this feature, and later, we will
completely revamp the App by designing the screens using
code.
Storyboard allows you to add any items to your screen, such
as labels, buttons, text fields, and so on. You can also change the
color, text, font sizes, and many more in the property’s screen.
The reason most programmers don’t use the storyboard in the

--- Page 35 ---
final version of their App is because when you create the screen
using code, you can create complex screen without worrying
about overlapping objects and anchors, and it is easier to draw
the App the way you want it on different form factors of iOS
devices.
Apple released the language Swift in October 2014. Ever
since then, it has continued to grow, and it has become the most
preferred language for iOS coding. Prior to Swift, Apple had
Objective-C as the primary language. There are over 1.5 million
jobs created around App design and development since the
launch of the App Store in 2008. The best part about Swift is
that it is not difficult for beginners to learn.
Before you get started with coding, consider reading the
next section to learn how you can install Xcode.
Installation and System Requirements
Apple has only created Xcode for its own Mac products. Xcode
requires running macOS 10.13.6 or later. You will need 11.2 GB
of storage on your Mac to install this application.
To install Xcode, search for it in the App Store. Look for the
App that looks like the image shown as follows.
It will probably take some time to download, as it is a big
file. After the initial download is complete, it will ask you to
agree to the terms and conditions document. After you select
agree, it will begin installing the components.
Interface Introduction
When you first launch Xcode, your screen should look
something like this.

--- Page 36 ---
Your initial Xcode screen will have two columns. On the left
side, you will see three options that you can select right
underneath the Xcode logo. The first option will allow you to
create an Xcode project. This is what we will be using when we
start creating our App. Underneath that, you will see the button
which allows you to clone an existing project. This is useful
when the project you are going to work on is quite like an
existing project, or when you need to do major changes to an
already existing project.
If you select the third option, you will be able to search
through files on your computer. Most of the time, you will not
need to use this feature, because the right side of the screen
will show the recent projects that you have been working on. If
you want to create a new playground, you will go to File ➤  New
➤  Playground.
If you select Create a new Xcode Project, or go to File ➤  New
➤  Project, it will ask you to select a template for your project.
On the top of the screen, you can choose what platform you
would like to use (IOS, MacOS, etc.), and you can choose which
type of application you would like to make. For the purposes of
this book, we will select iOS, and the first option, App. If you
explore a little more, you will notice there are different types of
Apps too, such as games and messaging.
Selecting next will take you to the screen where you add
additional information, such as your product name and
organization. Since we are just going through the interface right
now, feel free to fill out this information however you want.
Later, when we start building the Book Tracker App, we can
give more logical values and names. Make sure you have
selected “Storyboard” instead of Swift UI for the interface.

--- Page 37 ---
Note The Bundle Identifier must be unique. This name
allows others to find you in the App Store.
This is the initial screen you will see when you first launch your
application. On the left-hand side, you will notice a list of
different files which we will be using throughout our App
creation. The folder Test Run-Through is the name of the main
App folder, which has many other files within. The screen that
is initially shown is where you will enter basic settings. You can
scroll through and add/change any details that you desire. For
now, we will stick to the default values.
Figure 1-4 App Storyboard
Here is the Main Storyboard screen. We will spend a lot of
time here during the beginning stages of our application.

--- Page 39 ---
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, we learned about Xcode, the integrated
development environment (IDE) platform we will use to
develop our iPhone App. The chapter provided a step-by-step
guide to install Xcode and provided the basic understanding of
the Xcode interface. It is highly recommended to explore the
interface and learn about the different screen layouts before
you begin coding.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 40 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of
Springer Nature 2023
S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloud
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_2
2. CloudKit Overview
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
Ever since Apple announced CloudKit, a new avenue for cloud-
based App development has emerged for developers. CloudKit
offers a great avenue for Apps that need interactions with other
App users. Prior to CloudKit, developers used to create
homegrown solutions from authentication to data sync, which
is not an easy task to do besides being vulnerable to security
breaches. CloudKit wraps all such complexities and provides a
scalable architecture to develop data-persistent, cloud-based
applications.
In this chapter, we will learn some basics, including setting
up CloudKit the dashboard, and managing CloudKit-based
applications.
CloudKit at a Glance
CloudKit was first introduced in 2014 and, since then, has gone
through many revisions. It is a simple way to integrate your
applications (iOS, WatchOS, MacOS, and TVOS) to iCloud. Apple

--- Page 41 ---
also uses CloudKit to natively integrate its own family of
products. For example, when you Share a Note with another
user, Apple is using CloudKit as Backend as a Service (BaaS) to
make that share happen. Following are some key offerings that
we will learn in future chapters of the book:
Share content among App users, you can natively share data
with other application users.
Securely share and manage data, the security is natively
built in. You can define the access and role other App users
can have on your data sets.
Data Privacy, the beauty of CloudKit is that the user's data is
stored in their own private databases (unless you explicitly
define it to be a public database or a shared database). Even
the creator of the application cannot access the data of
another user.
Distributed Data set, your application user’s data are stored
in their own iCloud instance. You don’t have to invest in data
scaling as your user base grows.
Multi-environment API support, Apple has made the
CloudKit API ubiquitously available across platforms. You can
have an Android version of your App accessing data from
CloudKit database using its open APIs.
Up to 2GB of data without any charge, you can make your
application production ready with very little investment
Dev and Prod environment, you get a staging environment,
where you can play around. When you make your application
production ready, you can easily upgrade it to Production.
A Dashboard to define and manage databases.
Setting Up CloudKit

--- Page 42 ---
Before you can explore the CloudKit functions, you need to
configure the same in the Xcode interface. After iCloud is
enabled, an entitlement file is created which is required to
access any iCloud features. The setup of CloudKit is a five-step
process.
Step 1: Open the Xcode project for which you want to set up
CloudKit and click on the Project icon in the project Navigator.
The project properties window will appear as shown in Figure
2-1.
Figure 2-1 Xcode Project Settings Signing Screen 1
Step 2: Before you add CloudKit to your project, you need to
sign into iCloud. This is required because CloudKit persists all
data in iCloud. iOS uses the logged in user to authenticate the
user for all your application data transactions. On the top bar in
the middle screen, click on Signing & Capabilities. From the
screen presented, click on the Team field; if you don’t find your

--- Page 43 ---
name, then click on add an account and login using your Apple
ID. Once logged in, your screen will look like in Figure 2-2.
Figure 2-2 Xcode Project Settings Signing Screen 2
Step 3: Now that you have logged in, you can add the
CloudKit capabilities. In the Screen, click + Capability. A popup
screen will be presented, search for iCloud. Once found, double
click on iCloud to add the capability. You will be presented with
a screen, as shown in Figure 2-3.

--- Page 44 ---
Figure 2-3 Xcode iCloud Extension Screen
Once added, the screen shown in Figure 2-4 will appear.

--- Page 45 ---
Figure 2-4 Xcode Project Settings Signing Screen 3
Step 4: If Status shows warning. Click on sign and enter
your Apple ID to get the provision profile and the signing
certificate. Once signed in, the screen will look like the one
shown in Figure 2-5:

--- Page 46 ---
Figure 2-5 Xcode Project Settings Signing Screen 4
The middle section of the preceding screen is zoomed in
Figure 2-6 for better clarity.
Figure 2-6 Xcode Project Settings Signing Screen 5

--- Page 47 ---
Step 5: The iCloud settings has three parts: Services,
Containers, and CloudKit Dashboard. Based on the selection in
the Services section, the iCloud repository is notified on what
kind of data it needs to store. Container needs a unique name to
hold your application data and content. Finally, the Cloudkit
Dashboard, when clicked, launches the iCloud portal where you
can visually manage all iCloud objects and perform required
CRUD operations. A brief description for each option is listed as
follows:
Services: Key-Value Storage: Enable this feature if you want
certain application configuration or preference to be
available in every instance of your App across iOS devices.
For example, application preference, A change in value in one
instance will be reflected in other instances immediately.
There are certain limitations to how much space is available
per user. Every user Key-Value space is limited to 1 MB per
user. Also, 1024 is the maximum number of keys you can
have. For more details, visit the official Apple developer site.
Services: iCloud Documents: Use this option to store file-
based content like Word docs, complex drawings, or any blob
content.
Services: CloudKit: Enable this feature to store database
records. This feature acts like a classic relationship database.
We will use this feature mostly in our book.
Containers: If you are using it for the first-time, containers
may appear empty. Container provides a logical structure to
hold your schema, data, indexes, logs, and relationship. We
need to have a minimum of one container to use the CloudKit
features. Please note, the CloudKit container once created
cannot be deleted. We will create a container in the next
section.

--- Page 48 ---
CloudKit Dashboard: This is the single access point to
manage all your CloudKit functions. We will explore this in
the next section.
Exploring CloudKit Dashboard
CloudKit Dashboard is a convenient way to manage all CloudKit
functions in an easier, user-friendly way. Although everything
that we can do using the dashboard can be done using Swift
programming, it is still the best way to configure your
application initial setup. We will configure the tables for our
Book Tracker App using the iCloud Dashboard. (Note: If the
tables are not defined, they get automatically created when the
App saves a record to the database.)
Accessing the iCloud Dashboard
For accessing the iCloud Dashboard, you can either go to the
Xcode application settings and click the CloudKit Dashboard
button under Signing & Capabilities settings screen (as shown
in Figure 2-7) or

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 2-7 Xcode Project Settings Signing Screen 6
you can directly go to the URL
https://icloud.developer.apple.com/dashboard/
and login using your Apple ID and password.
Before we can do any setup in the CloudKit Dashboard, we
need to create a container from the Xcode interface. Please
note, containers once created cannot be deleted. To create a
container, click the + icon under the Container. For this book,
we will use an already created Container called iCloud.Genie
(you have to use a different name as container names are
unique).
Understanding the Dashboard
From the left sidebar, select the Container iCloud.Genie. You will
be presented with a screen like the one displayed in Figure 2-8.

--- Page 50 ---
Figure 2-8 iCloud Dashboard Home Screen
1. Container Permission: If you have more than one
developer, you can set the permission for each developer
using this option.
 
2. API Access: Using API Token, any web front application can
request an access to the Container and its data and
environment.
 
3. Data: Data is where all application data persists. There are
three types of databases, Private (only the user will have
access to its own data), Public (All users of the applications
can see data), and Shared (Users can share data among a
select set of users). Data holds all application data, indexes,
and its permission as designed in an application schema
structure.
 
4. Schema: This is where we can define the Record Types, set
indexes and subscriptions, and Security Roles.  

--- Page 51 ---
5. Logs: Logs provide live and historical application logs.  
6. Telemetry: Provides a graphical representation of
important database analysis over period, such as Requests,
Server Latency, Error Count, Average Request Size, and
Push notifications.
 
7. Usage: Usage gives the application usage pattern across
Storage (Database and Asset), Users, Number of Requests
per second by Database Type. We can see the usage by daily
or monthly view.
 
Creating Book Tracker Table (Table, type,
Indexes)
In this section, we will create the schema structure for the Book
Tracker App that we are going to build. Please note, explicitly
creating a table is not necessary as, when we define the table in
code, it automatically gets created when you run it for the first
time. Observe the following steps for creating it through the
interface.
1. From the dashboard page, click the Schema Icon. Please
note we are in a development environment. Once we are
done with our development, we will promote it to the
production environment. (Note: We created iCloud.Genie
from the Xcode interface.) Figure 2-9 shows the selected
schema detail dashboard.
 

--- Page 52 ---
Figure 2-9 iCloud Dashboard Home Screen
Content Types are Record Types storing the definition of a
table. A Table has both system- and user-defined attributes
that define the character of the table. From the screen, add a
Content Type and name it as Book and click the save button.
Figure 2-10 is the record types definition and editing screen.

--- Page 53 ---
Figure 2-10 iCloud Dashboard Record Types Screen
2. We will add the fields listed in Table 2-1 to the Book Record
Type. From the screen, click the Add Field and add the
following fields to the table. Make sure you click the save
button before exiting the screen. Please note, we will create
a few more tables in Part II of this book when we create the
advanced version of our Book Tracker App. Table 2-1 lists
all the field details of the schema type Book.
 
Table 2-1 Table Schema Details
Custom Field
Name
Type Description
BookID String An ID to uniquely identify books
bookname String Book Name
authorname String Author Name
genre String Book Genre

--- Page 54 ---
Custom Field
Name
Type Description
status String Current Status of the Book (Reading, Read,
Currently Reading)
3. To make the fields queryable/sortable/searchable, we need
to add the relevant indexes. For now, we are only adding a
queryable index. Click Edit Indexes and add queryable
index for all fields. Post addition of indexes, the screen
should look like Figure 2-11.
 
Figure 2-11 iCloud Dashboard Indexes Screen
Figure 2-12 shows all system and custom fields of Book data
type.

--- Page 55 ---
Figure 2-12 iCloud Dashboard Book Record Type
ScreenFigure
We are now ready with the initial table definition. Next, we
will build a screen to save a book record to the database. Please
note, for queries to work, we need to make the system field
recordName queryable.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the fundamentals of CloudKit.
We also explored how to create a CloudKit-aware iOS App, and
the steps we need to follow to configure an iOS-native cloud-
based database. Toward the end of the chapter, we learned
about CloudKit Dashboard, a convenient, user friendly way to
manage necessary CloudKit functions.
Now that we have covered the fundamentals of Swift
programming, in the next chapter, we will start building our
Book Tracker App basic version.

--- Page 56 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 57 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_3
3. Core Swift Concepts
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
This chapter will provide all the core swift concepts you need to know to makeyour Book Tracker App. Please note the list is not intended to be exhaustive, but asa comprehensive reference guide to help you create your App.
Variables
Learning to define and use variables are basics of Swift programming. We aregoing to focus on the following variable definition types. This is not an exhaustivelist, but the important ones that we will need to develop our App using the Swiftlanguage.
Let and Var
Variables are containers which store values in transient state during the executionof a program. To define a variable, we must either use “let” or “var” to let Swiftknow, a) a variable is defined and, b) the type of the value the variable must store.Use “let” when the variable value is not going to change in the scope of theprogram, and “var” when it will change and will require reassignment of a newvalue to the variable during the execution of the program. It is a good practice touse “let” if the value is not going to change. Examples
let name:String = ""
In this example, we define a variable called “name” of type String which has anempty String
Basic Types

--- Page 58 ---
Types define what value a variable should store. The key types which we will bemostly using in our Book Tracker Apps are
Int or Int32 or Int64: This stores Integer valueString: String literalsBool: a true or false or 1 or 0Double: represent 64-bit floating-point number
Types always come after the variable name separated by colon (“:”)Please note if the type is not defined, then the variable automatically assumesthe type based on the value assigned. For example, in the following line, the titlevariable will be a String variable, which the system deciphers based on the stringliteral provided in the quotes.
let title = "This is a test string"
Classes, Structures, and Objects
Classes and structures are a logical collection of variables and methods, whichencapsulate complexities and represent a meaningful blueprint of an object.Consider, for instance, you want to define a book in our program. A book can havea book name, author name, and genre. Instead of defining three variables, we candefine a class which can contain all the three basic types. The difference between aClass and a structure is how it is referenced.
Structs are value types, while classes are reference types.To use a class or a struct, we need to first define it and then create an object. Therecan be many objects for a class or struct. When we pass around an object, for class,we always pass around object reference, whereas for struct, we pass value. This isan important point, so if you want to change the same object value across theprogram, class is the way to go; otherwise, struct is a safer bet as it is thread-safeand there is no additional burden we need to carry to do synchronization or dirtyvalue checking.
ClassThe syntax of class definition is as follows:
class <name of the class>:<class Type>{var <variablename>:<type>!var <variablename>:<type>!...}

--- Page 59 ---
Example
class Book:NSObject{   //Book is the class name of typeNSObjectvar bookname:String!  //variable bookname of string type !sign forces valuevar authorname:String! //variable authorname of stringtypevar genre:String! //variable genre of string type}
NSObject is the native root class from which every subclass is inherited.Once the class is defined, we need to define the object using var or let, as explainedin the following:
var book = Book()
notice the constructor () after the class name to instantiate the class as anobject which is now referred as book.
StructsThe syntax of struct definition is as follows:
struct <name of the class>{var <variablename>:<type>!var <variablename>:<type>!...}
Example
struct Book {   //Book is the struct name. Notice there isno object inheritance requiredvar bookname:String!  //variable bookname of string type !sign forces valuevar authorname:String! //variable authorname of stringtypevar genre:String! //variable genre of string type
ArrayArrays are structures to hold multiple values of a particular kind of element. Swiftallows a single and multidimensional array of any type (basic types, classes, or

--- Page 60 ---
structures). In our Book Tracker App, we will need a book array to hold all thebook names that the user has read (a one dimensional String Array) or a bookdetails array holding book names, author, and genre (a class object array).How to define Arrays
Var <nameof the array>:[Type] = [Values optional ]var bookName:[String] = ["Xcode Development", "iPhone AppCoding" ]
bookName array is of type string, which is initialized with all two book names.
var author:[String] = []
author array is of type string, which is initialized blank. Value can be assignedlater.
class Book:NSObject{       var bookname:String!        var authorname:String!        var genre:String!        var status: String!    }var books:[Book] = []
books variable is an array of type Book class, which can hold multiple Bookdetails (name, author, genre, and status)Accessing an Array
for <item> in < class or struct array name>{print(item.<class or struct variable name>)}
This for loop as follows will print all book details
for book in books{print(book. bookname)print(book. authorname)print(book. genre)}
Scope
Swift follows the Object-Oriented programming principles for object visibility.

--- Page 61 ---
Program level: If an object is defined outside of a class will be visible atprogram the level.Class level: An object when defined within a class, all methods in the class willhave access to it.Function level: An Object defined in a method is accessible and visible only atthe method level.Loop or conditional block: An object defined within a loop, or a conditionalblock, is only accessible in the scope of the loop or block. If there are nestedloops or conditional blocks, the variable defined in the outer loop, or theconditional block, is visible in the inner loops. The reverse is not true.private: When a variable is defined private, it is only accessible to the visiblefunctions and methods of the object. Inherited classes of the parent class, wherethe private variable is defined, will not have access to the private scope variable.public: If not qualified as private by default, the scope is defined as public.
Example
var global:Int = 1class Scopetest:NSObject{........var classlevel:Int = 2private var classlevel2:Int = 3func firstFunction() {var first:Int = 4      print(global)  //this will print the value 1print(classlevel)  //this will print the value 2print(classlevel2)  //this will print the value 3print(first)  //this will print the value 4if(first < 1){var second:Int = 5}print(second) - second is not visible as it is defined inthe conditional block}func secondFunction() {      var second:Int = 6print(global)  //this will print the value 1print(classlevel)  //this will print the value 2print(classlevel2)  //this will print the value 3print(first)  // error  - first scope is restricted tothe  firstFunction

--- Page 62 ---
print(second)  //note this will print 6 not 5}}
class  ScopeTest2:ScopeTest{....func printValues(){print(global)  //this will print the value 1 as this aprogram level valueprint(classlevel)  //this will print the value 2 as it isa class level variable and ScopeTest2 is an inheritedclassprint(classlevel2)  // error – private variable can onlybe accessed by the classprint(first)  // error  - first scope is restricted tothe  firstFunctionprint(second)  // error  - first scope is restricted tothe  secondFunction or the conditional block}}
In summary, scope is of three types:
Global Scope: this will be at program/App level. All Classes in the product willhave access to any global variable.Class Scope: the scope of this variable is limited to the scope of the classFunction Scope: any variable defined at the function is only accessible withinthat function.
When a variable is defined as private, it is available within the scope where it isdefined for that class. Any inherited class will not have access to any privatevariable. Like variable functions can be defined as private or public. Same rulesapply for functions as well.
Functions
The concept of modular programming highly encourages writing logical code inself-contained blocks. This helps in not only getting the code more modularized,hence readable, but also in case if the same block of code is required for executionmultiple times, we can define it once and use it by just calling the function. A Swiftfunction can be
Simple block of code with no input or output parameters. When the function iscalled, it executes the code within its body.

--- Page 63 ---
Block of code with input parameters. This type of function accepts certain inputparameters, which the method will use to perform the required function.Function with both input and output parameters. Though a function can takemultiple parameters, but the return is always one type.
Example
Class BookViewController:UIViewController{  //ClassBookViewController is of type UIViewController Systemclassoverride func viewDidAppear(_ animated: Bool) {  // noticeoverride, we are overriding the parent functionviewDidAppear                        // it is taking a bool value in avariable called animatedaddNumbers() //  it will print "Number is 3"addNumbers(firstNo: 20, secondNo: 30) //  it will print"Number is 50"              // notice it is mandatory to provideparameter name when _ is not used     before the parameter name in defining the functionlet finalNo = addNumbers(2, 30) //  this function return32                 // notice the parameter name is notrequired as the parameter has _ before the name                 // notice finalNo type is not defined.Swift automatically typecast to the required typeprint("Number is \(finalNo)") // it will print 32}private func  addNumbers(){ // function not taking anyinputs not returning any valuelet firstNo:Int = 1let secondNo:Int = 2print("Number is \( firstNo + secondNo)")}private func  addNumbers( firstNo:Int, secondNo:Int){ //functions takes two parametersprint("Number is \( firstNo + secondNo)")}private func  addNumbers(  _ firstNo:Int, _ secondNo:Int)-> Int{ // functions takes two parameters and returning an

--- Page 64 ---
integerreturn firstNo + secondNo}}
Beautifying Strings Using NSAttributedString
Swift text field, label, and button UI Objects can display text with the .text property.If we need to beautify a portion of text with different font, color, size, or kerning,there is another property called .attributedText. The following section shows howwe can define a font object, a paragraph style, and assign it to a label object.
let label = UILabel() // defining a label UI objectvar font = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 16, weight: .bold) //defining a font variable with size 16 and with weight boldvar paragraphStyle = NSMutableParagraphStyle() // define avariable of NS Mutable paragraph Style objectparagraphStyle.alignment = .center //making theparagraphStyle variable center alignefparagraphStyle.firstLineHeadIndent = 5.0 //setting theparagraph’s first line top indent to 5.0 pixellet attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [  // weare setting NS Attribute String object to the defined fontand paragraph Style           and color of the text as black.font: font,.foregroundColor: UIColor.black,.paragraphStyle: paragraphStyle]var attributedLabel = NSAttributedString(string: "TestLabel", attributes: attributes) // assigning a text labelwith the defined attributeslabel.attributedText = attributedLabel //assigning the NSAttribute string to the label attributedText
Life Cycle Methods
In our Book Tracker App, we have extensively used View controllers for all thedisplay screens. Every view controller has a set of lifecycle methods, which areimportant to learn to understand what we need to do when the view is loaded, orwhen the view disappears. Figure 3-1 provides a quick view of the importantmethods and the time when they are triggered.

--- Page 65 ---
Figure 3-1Life Cycle Method Lifecycle
viewDidLoad: This method is called when the view is loaded. Consider callingthis function when you want to call this function once. All the display setupfunction, data query for display can be called in this method.viewWillAppear: This method is called before the view is visible. Considerusing this function for activities you want to call every time the view controlleris getting loaded. For example, if we need to hide fields or manipulate certainactions, this is the right place to do it.viewDidAppear: This method is called after the view is visible. Consider usingthis function for activities you want to perform after the view controller isloaded. For example, if we need to query for all books every time the view loadsbecause we might have deleted/added a book, this is a good place to call such afunction.viewWillDisappear: This is called before the view is removed from the viewhierarchy. Unloading animations, hiding the keyboard, and canceling networkrequests are some of the actions you can perform here.viewDidDisappear: This is called when the view disappears. Stopping listeningto notifications is a good example of activities we can perform here.viewDidDisappear: When the view controller is removed from the hierarchy,this function is called. Stopping to listen to a notification is a good example of atask that can be done in this method.

--- Page 66 ---
Type Casting
While writing Swift programs, we will have occasion when we have downcast avariable from its superclass to a subclass. This could be both for native data types(for example, converting an Int64 to Int, or a Double to Int) or for custom datatype. For custom data type, we will take an example of our Book Type to show howit works
Step 1: Book Class
Book class has a variable to store the book name and an init method to initializethe variable
class Book {
        var name: String
        init(name: String){
            self.name = name
        }
    }
Step 2: Fiction Class Subclass of Book Class
Fiction class is a subclass of Book class; it has a variable to store the fiction genrename and an init method to initialize the genre, which also calls the Book superclass to initialize the book name.
class Fiction:Book {
        var genre: String
        init(name:String, genre: String){
            self.genre = genre
            super.init(name: name)
        }
    }
Step 3: Non-Fiction Class Subclass of Book Class
Non-Fiction class is a subclass of Book class. It has a variable to store the non-fiction genre name and an init method to initialize the genre, which also calls theBook super class to initialize the book name.

--- Page 67 ---
class Nonfiction:Book {
        var genre:String
        init(name:String, genre:String){
            self.genre = genre
            super.init(name: name)
        }
    }
Step 4: Define an Object of Type Book Class
We are defining an array of books called library and initializing it with four books
let library = [ Fiction(name: "As You Like It", genre:"Classic"),
                    Nonfiction(name: "The Splendid and the Vile", genre:"History"),
                    Fiction(name: "To Sir With Love", genre: "Educational"),
                    Nonfiction(name: "Feeling Good", genre: "CognitiveTherapy"),
    ]
Step 5: Method to Count Fiction or Non-fiction Class
Looping through the library to count all fiction and nonfiction books – notice thedowncast from book to Fiction and Non-Fiction using the “as” qualifier.
func getBookCounts(){
        var fictionCount = 0
        var nonFictionCount = 0
        for book in library{
            if book in Fiction{
                fictionCount += 1
            }else if book in Nonfiction{
                nonFictionCount += 1
            }
        }

--- Page 68 ---
        print("Total Fiction books are \(fictionCount) and the TotalNon Fiction books are \(nonFictionCount)")
    }
Loop Controls
Swift provides many ways to loop through an array of objects. We will go throughthe most important ones.
For-In Loops
For-in loops are used to iterate over items of an array.
let library = [ Fiction(name: "As You Like It", genre:"Classic"),
                    Nonfiction(name: "The Splendid and the Vile", genre:"History"),
                    Fiction(name: "To Sir With Love", genre: "Educational"),
                    Nonfiction(name: "Feeling Good", genre: "CognitiveTherapy"),
    ]
    func getBookCounts(){
        for book in library{
            print(book.name)
        }
    }
For In-Loop with Range
This is used to go through a range of numbers in incremental orders. Let usassume we need to go through all the books we have in the library and displaysome book-related data. Currently, we are printing the number. The followingfunction will print 4 rows with values in incremental order 0
123
let library = [ Fiction(name: "As You Like It", genre:"Classic"),

--- Page 69 ---
                    Nonfiction(name: "The Splendid and the Vile", genre:"History"),
                    Fiction(name: "To Sir With Love", genre: "Educational"),
                    Nonfiction(name: "Feeling Good", genre: "CognitiveTherapy"),
    ]
    func demonstrateForCloseRange(){
        for count in 0..<library.count{
            print(count)
        }
    }
While Loop
While loop is executed till a condition is met. In the following example, we willprint the books in the library count is equal to 2 (the count starts from 0)
let library = [ Fiction(name: "As You Like It", genre:"Classic"),
                    Nonfiction(name: "The Splendid and the Vile", genre:"History"),
                   Fiction(name: "To Sir With Love", genre: "Educational"),
                   Nonfiction(name: "Feeling Good", genre: "CognitiveTherapy"),
    ]
    func whileDemostration(){
        var count = 0
        while count < 2 {
            print(library[count].name)
        }
        count += 1
    }
UI Color

--- Page 70 ---
This chapter introduces the UI Color feature in Swift. The following sections willhelp you to understand the UI Color Object in greater detail.
OverviewUI Color is an object that stores color data and sometimes opacity. UI Colorinherits from the NSObject, the root class for most Swift hierarchies. UI Color helpsto bring color to your App, allowing you to customize your App's appearance,communicate with the user, and help them to visualize your data. Make sure toread and understand section two, Guidelines for UI Color, before implementingcolor into your App. UIColor includes many different class prosperities that createcolors such as blue, green, and more. You can create more unique shades bychanging the values of the colors through RGB, hue, and saturation.
Guidelines for UI Color
Apple provides a Human Interfaces Guidelines for using UI Color in your Apps. Thefollowing is a summarized version of the five most important notes from the AppleGuidelines.First, you must not completely rely on color in your App for differentiatingbetween objects or to deliver important information. Users with colorblindness orwith disabilities may find it difficult to use your App if you do so, so it would bemore beneficial to communicate your information in a second way, in addition tousing color. This could be done in many ways, such as through text labels, shapes,or images. Color is a powerful tool; however, one must not solely rely on colorwhen producing an App.Second, make sure to be smart about how you implement colors into your App.Certain colors affect the mood or feelings of the user, for example, dark colors suchas red may make the user anxious while calm and warm colors would be soothingto the user. A simple change in color may have a huge impact on how the userinteracts with your application. Colors like red would be beneficial when making awarning or cancel sign. If you use red elsewhere in the App, in addition to thewarning sign, it may be less effective.Third, don’t overcomplicate your App with too many colors. For the optimumuser experience, it is best to keep your color palette sampler with lighter colorsthat are consistent throughout the App rather than mixing too many colors thatare not effective with each other. If you look at one of the apps on your phone, youwill notice how each App has a unique color scheme that is consistent throughoutthe App.Fourth, important objects in your App should stand out. For example, if you arewriting an App that has a check bar, you must make sure that the color you choosefor the check bar stands out and is not hidden by the other colors in your App.

--- Page 71 ---
Don’t use the same color for interactive and non-interactive elements to avoid anyconfusion from the user.Fifth, it is always better to have alternate color options for the user. Allow theuser to choose which color he/she wants to use the App in by making the option insettings or elsewhere in the application. Also create two accent colors for eachcolor option provided so that the App looks good in both dark mode and lightmode.Keep these notes in mind when making your Swift App.
System ColorsWhen implementing colors into your App, it is best to use an API. Never hard codesystem color values into your App as iOS offers a range of system colors already inthe system. Figure 3-2 provides a table of the UI Colors in Swift

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 3-2Swift System Colors
Dynamic System Colors
iOS has semantically defined system colors in addition to the general color types.These colors automatically adapt to light or dark modes, and each color always hasits own purpose. These colors may be used for backgrounds, or for foreground,such as for labels, buttons, and others. There are two types of background colors,including system and grouped. Each of these types contains its own variants toconvey a hierarchy of information.
Getting System Colors

--- Page 73 ---
When you want to use a specific shade or color in your program, you can use thestandard color objects. There are fixed colors such as red, blue, black, among manyothers, and you can create your own shades by using different hues and RGB. Youcan also alter the opacity of the color in your program.
SyntaxIn the following example, we are setting the color of the View Controllerbackground color to white.
Define Using System Defined Color
view.backgroundColor = .white
Define Using RGB
We can find the RGB of any color through any publicly available color picker orusing Swift Color Picker in the Main Storyboard. The number ranges from 0 to 255and needs to be divided by 255 to get the accurate CG Float number. Alpha is usedfor transparency. Any value less than 1 will make the color opaque.
view.backgroundColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 255/255, green:255/255, blue: 255/255, alpha: 1)
CG Color
Swift allows access to the fundamental Core Graphics for layering, transforming, orcoloring. For instance, for an UI Button, we can access its core layer and color theborder with a defined color. Since it is the core graphics, we need to use CG Colorinstead of UI Color. We can either use a CGColor graphics Init or convert a UI Colorto CGColor.
let bookLabelButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.contentEdgeInsets = UIEdgeInsets(top: 5, left: 5,bottom: 0, right: 0)
        button.contentHorizontalAlignment = .center
        button.contentVerticalAlignment = .center
        button.setTitleColor(.white, for: .normal)
        button.titleLabel?.font =  UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 16)

--- Page 74 ---
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.titleLabel?.numberOfLines = 5
         button.titleLabel?.lineBreakMode =NSLineBreakMode.byWordWrapping
        button.backgroundColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 89/255, green:140/255, blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
         button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect:button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        return button
    }()
Note that the border color is set in two ways:, one using system color and theother using UIColor RGB. Also, notice the typecasting to cg color.
UINavigationBar
UINavigationBar in most of the cases will be used as part of a Navigationcontroller to navigate between screens (Figure 3-3). In such cases, the UINavigation creates a navigation item stack and uses system-defined push and popto navigate between the screens in the stack.
Figure 3-3UI Navigation Bar Structure

--- Page 75 ---
A UI Navigation Bar typically appears at the top of the screen and has threeparts, a display title, a left Bar Button Item, and a right Bar Button Item. Thebuttons can be used to perform any action or function and it behaves like a UIButton. The events and properties of UI Button are inherited by the UI Bar ButtonItem.Some important properties of the UI Navigation Bar are listed in Table 3-1.
Table 3-1UI Navigation Bar Key Properties
BackgroundColor Setting up a color for the navigation Bar
let navigationBar = UINavigationBar()
Defined the navigation bar variable
navigationBar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 171/255, green: 189/255,blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
setting the background color using UIColor RGB values.
Setting UpNavigationItems
Navigation Bar title, right button and left button can be set throughUINavigationItem
let navItem = UINavigationItem(title: “Your Title”)
defining a variable of type UI Navigation Item. The constructor takes theTitle of the bar as an input parameter.
let resetSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 15,weight: .black)
let resetImage = UIImage(systemName: “arrowshape.turn.up.left.fill”,withConfiguration: resetSymbolConfiguration)
let resetItem = UIBarButtonItem(image: resetImage, landscapeImagePhone:resetImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action: #selector(resetButtonAction))
navItem.leftBarButtonItem = resetItem
The preceding line of code defines an Image, assigns configuration elements,and then the image is assigned to the left Bar Button of the Navigation Item.Similarly, we can assign another image to the right-hand bar item.
  Please note the definition of the method resetButtonAction. When the usertouches the left button, this custom method will be called.
navigationBar.setItems([navItem], animated: false)
Finally, we assign the navItem Array to the navigation bar object, which willdisplay it on the screen.
UIImage and UIImageView
Images are often needed for better interaction and enhancing visual appeal. SwiftUI Image objects can display all kinds of images (the recommended types are PNG

--- Page 76 ---
and JPEG). UIImage contains the data of the image and UIImageView is a customview to display the image referenced by the UIImage object. We can put anUIImage on other UI objects such as Button, Navigation Bar, and SegmentedControls.
How to Create an UIImage View
let image = UIImage(systemName: "book ")let imageView = UIImageView(image: image!)
In the preceding example, we are creating an UIImage object using a systemimage (iOS offers a collection of predefined images that can be used to displayimages. You can look them up in the Main StoryBoard by placing a tab bar buttonobject on the default view controller and in the Attribute Inspector Property Page,use the Image drop-down to look for all available images.)The UIImage object is stored in a variable image, which in turn is assigned tothe UIImageView.Please note UIImage has many constructors; the one we used in the previousexample creates the image object using System defined images. Some of the otheravailable constructors are created from content of a File and referring to an imagefrom the Asset Repository.Image is displayed after it is added to the display view or to the relevant UIobject.
UI Image View Key Properties
Table 3-2 provides details of the UI ImageView key properties
Table 3-2UI ImageView Key Properties
Alignmentto Center We are using the variable defined previously for UI Image View object -imageView
imageView.center = view.center
This will align the image view to the center of the view
Making theimageoutline tobe curved
We are using the variable defined previously for UI Image View object -imageView
imageView.layer.borderWidth = 1
imageView.layer.cornerRadius = 5
imageView.layer.borderWidth = UIColor.blue.cgColor
when applied, it will create a rounded corner like the image that follows:

--- Page 77 ---
  To get this effect, we need to access the visual content of the object. This wecan do by accessing the layer property of the image view object. We aresetting the border width to 1 pixel and corner radius to 5 to get the roundedcorner effect, and the color of the border to blue. As we are accessing thevisual content, we need to convert the UI Color object to native CG colorobject.
Please note, this can be applied to any visual object in Swift.
Image Sizeandpositioning
Image View can scale the image based on its size. In the following code, weare creating a frame object and setting its height, width, X and Y coordinates,and assigning it to the frame property of our imageView Object
var imageViewFrame = imageView.frame
imageViewFrame.size.width = 200
imageViewFrame.size.height = 200
imageViewFrame.origin.x = 0
imageViewFrame.origin.y = 0
imageView.frame = imageViewFrame
Please note this can be applied to any UI visual object in Swift.
Key MethodsUI Image View does not offer any default method; if we need to set up a clickevent, we need to use the Add Gesture Recognizer. Please note, this can be appliedto any UI visual object in Swift.
let tapGestureRecognizer = UITapGestureRecognizer(target: self,action: #selector(imageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:)))
imageView.isUserInteractionEnabled = true
imageView.addGestureRecognizer(tapGestureRecognizerReminder)
The first line defines a tap gesture, and it defines a method imageTapped which will becalled when the image will be tapped
The second line ensures user can interact with the imageView object
And the third line adds the gesture to the imageView object

--- Page 78 ---
In the custom defined method imageTapped, we can define the action we want to perform.
UITextField
Text Field is one of the most common UI Objects we will be using while creatingiOS Apps. We use UITextField to gather inputs from users. Users can enter valuesusing the onscreen keyboard, which is configurable to display the right keys foreasier data inputs (example, the display keyboard can be a numeric pad to restrictusers to only enter digits for a phone number text field). In our App, we will useText Field to input values such as Book Name, Author Name, and Search String.
How To Create an UITextField
let bookTextField = UITextField()
In the preceding example we created a UITextField named bookTextField
UITextField View Key PropertiesTable 3-3 provides details of the UI TextField key properties
Table 3-3UI TextField Key Properties
PlaceholderText Placeholder text is a text prompt that helps the user to know what isrequired to be entered. The text disappears as the text field gets focus
bookTextField.placeholder = “Enter Book Name”
Text Color We can set the color of Text with the following line of code
bookTextField.textColor = .white
since Text Color takes UIColor “.” Refers to UIColor there are certain system-defined colors. If you want to set a custom UIColor, we can use the UIColorRGB constructor.
BackgroundColor We can set the background of the Text Field using this property
bookTextField.backgroundColor= . .darkGray
since Text Color takes UIColor “.” Refers to UIColor there are certain system-defined colors. If you want to set a custom UIColor, we can use the UIColorRGB constructor.
Enabled The Enabled property takes a Boolean value. When set to false, the Text Fieldbecomes read only.
bookTextField.isEnabled = false
Hidden The Hidden property takes a Boolean value. When set to false, the Text Fieldbecomes invisible.

--- Page 79 ---
bookTextField.isHidden = false
Resign FirstResponder If we need to dismiss the keyboard, we can call this method on the Text Field
bookTextField.resignFirstResponder( )
Focus FirstResponder If we need to make the keyboard appear, we can call this method on the TextField
bookTextField.becomeFirstResponder( )
Key Methods
There are three events that come very handy in dealing with UI Text Field. Theseevents can be attached to the text field using the addTarget Method. The methodsare explained as follows:
1. Editing Did Begin 
This event is called as soon as the user starts typing in the Text Field.Operations such as setting the border color before user types is a good example ofoperations we can do in this event.
bookTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(bookTextFieldDidEnd), for: .editingDidBegin)
In the preceding line, we added the event .editingDidBegin to thebookTextField Target using the addTarget method. #selector helps in defining thecustom method bookTextFieldDidEnd, which will be called when the editingbegins.
2. Editing Did End 
This event is called when focus moves away from the Text Field. Operationssuch as resetting variables or capturing entered data are good examples ofoperations we can do in this event.
bookTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(bookTextFieldDidBegin), for: .editingDidEnd)
In the preceding line, we added the event .editingDidEnd to the bookTextFieldTarget using the addTarget method. #selector helps in defining the custom methodbookTextFieldDidBegin, which will be called when the editing begins.
3. Editing Did Changed 

--- Page 80 ---
This event is called every time a user starts typing. Operations such aschecking the entered value or formatting input fields based on data entry (likephone formatting), are a good example of operations you can do in this event.
bookTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(bookTextFieldEditingChanged), for:.editingChanged)
In the preceding line we added the event .editingChanged to the bookTextFieldTarget using the addTarget method. #selector helps in defining the custom methodbookTextFieldEditingChanged, which will be called when the editing begins.The custom method defined in all the three events takes a UITextFiled as aninput, which gives access to the text field. For example
@objc func bookTextFieldEditingChanged(textfield:UITextField){}
The textfield variable will give access to the current text filed.
4. Text Field Should Return 
If we need to capture the event when the Keyboard Return key is touched, wewill need this method. Unlike the other three events, this event is not part of theText Field available list of events. To enable this, we need to do the following:
Inherit the Delegate UITextFieldDelegate for the class.During the view initialization (for example, viewDidLoad method) set the textfield on which you need to enable the return key event, set the delegate to selfbookTextField.delegate = selfImplement the following method:
func textFieldShouldReturn(_ textField: UITextField) ->Bool{
        textField.resignFirstResponder()
}
In the preceding example, when the return key on the keyboard is pressed, thekeyboard will disappear.
UIAlertController

--- Page 81 ---
Alert Dialogs are an important part of iOS SDK, which, based on user interactionwith the App, we can display information and prompt users to take quick andappropriate action. Alerts come in very handy to confirm user actions to ensure itwas not done accidently. Example, a record getting a confirmation from a userdelete action is invoked. In this section, we learn how to create an alert, display itand, based on user response, take appropriate action.
Defining an AlertAlertViewController has a constructor which takes the following arguments:
Title: it takes a string which is the title of the AlertMessage: message Is a string literal which is displayed as the main informationstringPreferred Style: it could be either an alert or an action sheet (a list of actionsthat user can take)
let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Warning",message: "Book Name be Blank", preferredStyle: .alert)
Figure 3-4 shows how the system will show the alert screen.
Figure 3-4Save Alert Popup Screen
Alert Action and Working with User Action
Next, we will define the action buttons. When a user clicks on the button, aparticular set of actions will be executed in the button action block.
let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {                        UIAlertAction in//Do Something }

--- Page 82 ---
let okCancel = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {                        UIAlertAction in//Do Something }
We have defined two buttons using the UIAlrertAction constructor. The firstone is an “OK” button and the second one is a “Cancel” button. In the body of themethod, we can define what we want to perform when the user selects the button.Next, we will add the actions to the previously defined UIAlertController.
alertController.addAction(okAction)alertController.addAction(cancelAction)
Alert Display
So far, we have defined the Alert Controller object, defined the action buttons, andadded it to the Alert Controller. Now we are ready to display the alert. Use thefollowing code to achieve the same:
self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion:nil)
self refers to the View Controller and we are using the current view’s presentmethod to display the alert.
UITableViewTable Views are one of the most important UI Objects in the iOS toolkit. A tableview displays a collection of vertical rows where each row contains a collection ofinformation that is displayed on the screen. The table view is scrollable, allowingusers to scroll through a long list of content. Table view also allows grouping ofcontent and shows the content in separate sections. Each displayed row is a tableview cell, which can be customized to display any UI Object. In this section, we willlearn to create tables using code. We can also create a table view using theStoryBoard.
Creating a Table View
private let tableView:UITableView = {        let tableView = UITableView()        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints= false

--- Page 83 ---
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true        return tableView    }()
The preceding line of code will create a table view with a white backgroundcolor and scroll enabled to allow the user to scroll up or down the record set.
Delegate Methods
To implement a table-view, our class needs to inherit two delegates as explained inthe following:
UITableViewDelegate: UITableView Delegate is required to manage theselection, view, header and footer, and cell definition of table views. Essentially,the presentation of the table view is managed by this delegate.UITableViewDataSource: UI Table View Data source responds to data-relatedrequests from the table. All data-related queries for the table in the App iscontrolled by Table View Data Source delegate.We can use the following line of code to implement the delegates.
class viewController: UIViewController,UITableViewDelegate, UITableViewDataSource {
}
Please note, the table view delegates require a mandatory implementation fortwo system-defined methods. The first one is Number of Rows in the table view,and the second one is Cell for Row At, to display the records. We will learn this inthe Displaying the Table section as follows.
Setting the Table
The next step is to make the view aware about the table view. During the viewinitializing method (for example, in the viewDidLoad method), we need to set thefollowing:
Letting the class know that the table view we defined before confirms to thedefined delegates.
tableView.delegate = self
tableView.dataSource = self
Register the table with the type of Table Cell and give it a reference name. Cellsare used to display data in the table. The default system-defined table cell name

--- Page 84 ---
is UITableViewCell. UITableViewCell has two labels to display text. A main datalabel and a detailed text label. We can also customize the cell to display any UIObject component.
tableView.register(MotivationTableViewCell.self,forCellReuseIdentifier: "all")
Drawing the Table
Now that our table is defined, next we will display it on the screen. We will use thecustom method we have defined and explained before named setFieldLayout inour custom class CommonFunctions (see Part I to learn about this function).
view.addSubview(tableView)commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: tableView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0,rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 460)
The preceding line of code can be put in a custom-defined class, which can becalled in the view-initializing method (for example, in the viewDidLoad method).View is the current view.
Displaying a TableWe will discuss three system-defined functions which will help us to show thetable and relevant data on the screen.
Number of sectionsNumber of sections helps us to divide tables into logical groups of data sets.For example, if we need to show Books by the status of reading (“CurrentlyReading”, “To Be Read”, and “Read”), we will have three groups. Number ofsections in this case will be three.
func numberOfSections(in tableView: UITableView) -> Int{
        return <integer number>
 }
Number of RowsThis is a mandatory function and is required when Table Delegates areinherited. The function lets the table know how many rows are to be displayedfor each group. (If there is no grouping, one section is considered as a singlegroup).

--- Page 85 ---
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int {
        return <integer number>
}
Cell for Row AtThis is also a mandatory function and is required when Table Delegates areinherited. The function is repeated by system for each of the displayed row onthe screen. Each row has a UI Table Cell View used for displaying data.
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAtindexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
        let cell =tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "all",for: indexPath)
cell.textLabel?.text = ""
return cell
    }
The dequeuereusablecell is important to note when we create a cell. Itrepurposes displayed cells to optimize memory, as cells are costly resources.
Selection of Row
If we need to perform an action upon row selection, the following code will comein handy. We can perform function like displaying another table or another view.
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAtindexPath: IndexPath) {        <#code#>}
Refer to Part II to learn how a custom cell can be configured to have a buttonand upon event like touch up inside, we can invoke certain functions.
Table HeaderEvery section of the table can be assigned a Header view. Header view can becustomized to show any UI Object. In the following example, we will customize theheader view to show a UI label object.
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,

--- Page 86 ---
viewForHeaderInSection section: Int) -> UIView? {        let headerView = UIView.init(frame: CGRect.init(x:0, y: 0, width: tableView.frame.width, height: 50))        headerView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red:245/255, green: 245/255, blue: 245/255, alpha: 1)        let label = UILabel()        label.frame = CGRect.init(x: 0, y: 0, width:headerView.frame.width, height: headerView.frame.height)        label.text = "Motivation Technique"        label.textColor = .systemBlue        label.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 20)        label.textAlignment = .center        headerView.addSubview(label)        return headerView    }
The preceding line of code defines a view, headerView, which occupies thetable view width. We are setting the background of the view to the UI color of ourchoice. After that, we are defining a label and setting the width and height of thelabel frame to the header view height and width. A text, color, and font andalignment are set for the label, and it is added to the header view as a sub view.The header view is then returned to display on the table header view.
Cell Heights
Cell and header view heights are by default set to 40 pixels. When we definecustom cell and views, we may have to set the height of each cell or viewaccordingly.
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForRowAtindexPath: IndexPath) -> CGFloat {        return <Float>}
The preceding line defines the height of every row.
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,heightForHeaderInSection section: Int) -> CGFloat {        return <float>}
The preceding line defines the height of every section header.

--- Page 87 ---
Swiping Function
Table View cell also offers a swipe gesture where we can add other executablefunctions. The following code creates a delete swipe action gesture.
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {        let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style:.destructive, title: "Delete", handler: { (action, view,success) in          <#code#>        })        deleteAction.backgroundColor = .red        deleteAction.image = UIImage(systemName: "trash")        return UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions:[deleteAction])}
The method is a system defined table view function which returns a SwipeAction Gesture. A deleteAction variable of type UI Contextual Action type whichshows a trash icon on swipe and when user clicks it, the defined code in thehandler will be executed.
Summary
This is the only chapter in the book which introduces the user to core concepts ofcoding using the Swift language. This chapter is not exhaustive by any means, butprovides the most important concepts. We learned the following in the chapter:
How to define Variables, Classes, Struct, and ObjectsConcepts of storing objects and variables as ArraysHow to define functions and methodsTypecasting of ObjectsHow to Beautify StringsHow to Loop through OBjectsDefine core UI Objects - UILabel, UITextField, UITableView, UIAlertController,UIImage, UIImageView, UiNavigation, and UIColor
Now that we have learned the core concepts, we will apply them in thesubsequent chapters to create our Book Tracker App.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 88 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of
Springer Nature 2023
S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloud
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_4

--- Page 89 ---
(1)
4. Book Tracker Basic App Building
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
The next five chapters are dedicated to creating the Basic
version of the Book Tracker App. We will use the concepts we
have learned in the previous chapter to create our App. In this
chapter, we will create the Tab View Controller for our basic
version of the book tracker Application. The Tab View
Controller will help us navigate between three main screens -
Main Display, Adding a Book, and Searching Book.
Setting Up the Tab View Controller
The book tracker App will have a tab bar view controller from
where the user can navigate to three screens:
1. The Display screen: This is the home screen which will
display the list of books by status (Currently Reading, to be
Read, or Reading).
 
2. The Add Book screen: Using this screen, user can add books
to the digital library.
 
3. Search Screen: User can search books based on book name,
author, or genre.
 

--- Page 90 ---
Let us first set up a Tab View Controller. A Tab view
controller is a built-in navigator that helps a user to move
between tabs.
Follow the following steps to create an application:
Select App template from the iOS category. Figure 4-1 shows
the project template screen.
Figure 4-1 Project Template Selection
From the project options, as shown in Figure 4-2, please
provide the following (please change the values based on
your choice).
Name for your application under “Product Name” as
“MyLibrary”
Organization identifier – I have provided “SNN”
Make sure Interface is selected as StoryBoard

--- Page 91 ---
Language is Swift
And Use Core Data and Cloudkit for data persistence
Figure 4-2 Project Options
From the Project “Signing and Capabilities”, as shown in
Figure 4-3, under Team, use your Apple ID to sign in

--- Page 92 ---
Figure 4-3 Project Signing and Capabilities
Click the + symbol next to Capability and add iCloud
capability for Cloudkit container functions, as shown in
Figure 4-4.

--- Page 93 ---
Figure 4-4 Project Capability Selection
Select CloudKit under iCloud to enable cloud data storage, as
shown in Figure 4-5.

--- Page 94 ---
Figure 4-5 Project iCloud Settings
Creating a Tab Application
Follow the steps the following to create a Tab based
Application:
1. From the Project Navigator on the left, click
Main.Storyboard. This is where you can set up your
screens and Widgets. When you create the application, a
View Controller is created for you by default. Select the
View controller by either navigating through the
storyboard navigation and clicking on the Item Scene, or by
directly selecting the view controller from the visual
display the first small icon (item) on top of the Screen as
shown below. Figure 4-6 shows the visual builder screen.
 

--- Page 95 ---
Figure 4-6 Visual Builder Screen
2. We need to make this view controller a Tab View Controller.
To do that from the top Menu, go to Editor ➤  Embed In ➤
Tab View Controller, as shown in Figure 4-7.
 

--- Page 96 ---
Figure 4-7 Tab View Controller Menu Option
3. The screen will change, as shown in Figure 4-8. Please see
the gray Tab Bar Controller.
 

--- Page 97 ---
Figure 4-8 Screen Builder with Tab View Controller
Our Book Controller will have three Tabs:
Book Display – To display Books based on the assigned status
Add Book – Add a book to the repository
Search – Search any book based on certain criteria
4. We need to add three view controllers. From the top bar
below the menu, the first button from the left is the library
icon (+). Click it to add a View Controller. You can search by
typing the initial few letters of the Object. Notice I typed
“View Con”. Figure 4-9 shows the Add Object UI Screen.
 

--- Page 98 ---
Figure 4-9 UI Object Add Screen
5. Drag the two View Controllers (the first view controller
was already available) to the Storyboard. The Storyboard
should look like Figure 4-10.
 

--- Page 99 ---
Figure 4-10 Updated Visual Builder with the three View
Controller
6. For the newly added View Controller, we need to add a Tab
Bar Item. Click on the Library (+) and search for Tab Bar
Item, as shown in Figure 4-11.
 

--- Page 100 ---
Figure 4-11 UI Object Add Screen
7. Drag the Tab Bar Item to the view Controller. Do it twice,
one for each newly added View Controller. Note, the first
view controller already has the Tab Bar Item. Figure 4-12
shows the storyboard with all three Tab View Controller.
 

--- Page 101 ---
Figure 4-12 Screen Builder with Tab View Controller
8. We need to associate the Tab Bar Controller to the
remaining view controller. To do this, click and hold the
control button and drag the mouse from the Tab Controller
to the View Controller. Do it twice for each of the View
Controllers. After dragging, it will pop up a menu for the
Segue. Select Relationship Segue ➤  View Controllers. (Note:
Segues are visual connectors that allow a view controller to
pass data and present another view controller.) Figure 4-13
shows all three View controllers connected to the Main Tab
Controller.
 

--- Page 102 ---
Figure 4-13 Screen Builder with Connected Tab View
Controller
9. Next, we need to change the Icon for each of the Tab Bar
Items. Select the First View Controller Tab Bar Item. From
the right-hand side menu select the Attribute Inspector
(5th Icon from the left). We will provide the following
details:
Title as “Display”
Image – iOS offers many built-in Icons (you can also add
your custom image by creating it in tools like Adobe
Photoshop or GIMP and import it in the Assets folder of
your application) – we will use the built-in Book Icon.
Figure 4-14 shows the screens with updated Tab bar
icons.
 

--- Page 103 ---
Figure 4-14 Screen Builder – Setting Icons
10. Repeat this step for the remaining two View Controllers as
follows:
Second View Controller Title “Add Book”
Second View Controller Image “Pencil”
Third View Controller Title “Search”
Third View Controller Image “magnifyingglass”
 
Let us now run the application. For running, you can either
run it on your phone by connecting the phone to the laptop or
on a simulator. In this example, we will run it on an iPhone 12
Simulator. You can select the simulator from the top bar, as
shown in Figure 4-15.

--- Page 104 ---
Figure 4-15 Run Menu Option
After running the simulator application, it should look like
in Figure 4-16.

--- Page 105 ---
Figure 4-16 Simulator Screen
Congratulations, you have successfully launched the first
screen of your Book Tracker App.

--- Page 106 ---
Summary
In this chapter, we created the Tab View controller of our Basic
version of the Book Tracker App. The Tab view controller will
have three tabs: displaying Books, searching existing books, and
an option to add a Book to the repository.
In the next chapter, we will learn about Adding a Book to
our Book Tracker App.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 107 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_5

--- Page 108 ---
(1)
5. Adding Book Screen
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
In this Chapter, we will build the Add Book Screen. Add Book will allow the user to add thefollowing attributes of a book.
Book NameAuthor NameBook DescriptionGenre Name (User will be able to select from a list of Genres)Status (Read, Reading, to be read)
While adding a book, the following functions will be tested:
Existing book name with the same author’s name cannot be created again.For creation of a book, at least the Book name and Author Name will be required.By Default, the status will be To Be Read.Genre Name will be a pre-populated list. In this book, we will store in a String Array. Usercan also create an administration screen to update the Genre and persist in a database
We will learn the following concepts in this section:
Designing Screen using swift codeSwift Array handling, for GenreTable View core functionalityAbility to create a dynamic drop-down view using Swift Table View ConceptsCustom error handling conceptsPersist data in iCloud
Designing the Add ScreenSwift provides a few different ways to design screens. In the previous section, we use thestoryboard to design the Tab View navigation. Storyboard provides a UI-based interface andprovides a graphical interface to drag objects, arrange, and align them and set propertiesand connectors. While this method is more user friendly, often, for creating complexscreens, particularly when you have overlapping objects, it becomes quite a cumbersomeprocess.Another way to define a screen is to create the objects, layouts, and its associatedproperties programmatically. Going forward, we will do all screen design using swiftprogram.Create the View Controller File for Add Book:
1. The code of every UI Screen must be linked to the UI Cocoa Touch Swift file. Go aheadand create a new file from the file menu, as shown in Figure 5-1.  

--- Page 109 ---
Figure 5-1Create New View Controller
Table 5-1Life Cycle Methods
Life Cycle Methods
Every View Controller has a collection of lifecycle methods, which are executed based on certain events.The following code uses the default viewDidLoad() method, which is called when the view is loaded. Tolearn more about Lifecycle methods, please visit section Life Cycle Methods
2. Select the Cocoa Touch class, as shown in Figure 5-2. 

--- Page 110 ---
Figure 5-2Project template
3. Give a name to the File. Though you can give any name, following a nomenclature is agood Practice – I have named it AddBookViewController. Notice the subclass isUIViewController and language is Swift, as shown in Figure 5-3.
 

--- Page 111 ---
Figure 5-3Create New View Controller – New File Options
4. Once done, save the file in the project folder, as shown in Figure 5-4. 

--- Page 112 ---
Figure 5-4Create New View Controller - File Location
Assigning the Add View Controller File inMain.storyboardThe next step is to link the newly created Add View controller file to the Add ViewController screen in Main.storyboard
1. Click on Main Storyboard in the project navigator.  2. Select the Add Book View Controller. You can do that by clicking on the view controllericon in the storyboard, which is the first icon on the screen as shown in Figure 5-5.  

--- Page 113 ---
Figure 5-5Linking Add View Controller File to the View Controller Screen
3. In the Identity Inspector screen, enter the File name (in our case, it will beAddViewController) of the view controller. This way we have associated the ViewController file to the Add View Controller Screen. The code we write on this file will befor this screen.
 
Running the CodeWe will now Execute our shell program on a simulator.
1. Select the make of the phone from the set of the active schemes in the simulatorselection screen, as shown in Figure 5-6.  

--- Page 114 ---
Figure 5-6Simulator Selection
2. When the list is dropped down, it will show the following list of options. If your choiceof simulator is not present, you can Add additional simulators by clicking on the optionshown in Figure 5-7.
 
Figure 5-7Simulator Options
3. Run the program by clicking on run button on the menu bar or by selecting the menuoption Run under the product menu as shown in Figure 5-8.  

--- Page 115 ---
Figure 5-8Run Options
4. The simulator will pop up as a separate screen, and if you have followed the precedingsteps, it should show the screen as shown in Figure 5-9.  

--- Page 116 ---
Figure 5-9Simulator Screen
Defining the UI Objects for the Add ScreenThe Add Screen will have the following Objects:
1. Book Name – This will be an input text field for user to add the book name.  2. Author Name – This will be an input text field for user to add the author’s name.  3. Genre – This will be an input text field for user to select a genre from a drop-down list.  4. Status – This will be an input text field for the user to select the status from a drop-down list. Possible statuses are “Currently Reading,” “To Be Read,” and “Read.”  
Code to Create UI ObjectOpen the AddViewController File by clicking on the file name in the Project navigator. Thefile content should look like the code shown in Table 5-2.
Table 5-2Lifecycle method Code

--- Page 117 ---
Code ExplanationCode Explanation
//
//AddBookViewController.swift
// MyLibrary
//
// Created by ShantanuBaruah on 2/6/21.
//
import UIKit
classAddBookViewController:UIViewController {
override func viewDidLoad(){
super.viewDidLoad()
}
}
Please note there will be some commented section in the class,added during the creation of the file. For simplicity reasons, Ihave deleted it.
The class AddBookViewController extends the systemUIViewController class.
viewDidLoad() is the first method that will be called when thescreen is displayed.
Table 5-3UI Navigation Bar
UINavigationBar
UIImage and UIImageView
The following code defines the Navigation Bar UI Object. In our App, we are using UI Navigation BarObject to display the screen title and two UI Bar buttons, one for saving the book record and the other toreset the fields. Every UI Object has a view which can embed new UI Objects. In our following code, we areembedding an UI Image object into each of the bar button, so that appears visibly appealing.
Add the code shown in Table 5-4 to the class, so the visibility is across the class. These areUI objects that we will define programmatically.
Table 5-4Class Level UI Objects
private let addNavigationBar:UINavigationBar = {
let navigationBar = UINavigationBar()
navigationBar.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
navigationBar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 171/255, green:189/255, blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
let navItem = UINavigationItem(title: "Add a Book")
let resetSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize:15, weight: .black)

--- Page 118 ---
let resetImage = UIImage(systemName: "arrowshape.turn.up.left.fill",withConfiguration: resetSymbolConfiguration)
let editItem = UIBarButtonItem(image: resetImage, landscapeImagePhone:resetImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action:#selector(resetButtonAction))
let saveSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 20,weight: .black)
let saveImage = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill", withConfiguration:saveSymbolConfiguration)
let saveItem = UIBarButtonItem(image: saveImage, landscapeImagePhone:saveImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action:#selector(saveButtonAction))
navItem.rightBarButtonItem = saveItem
navItem.leftBarButtonItem = editItem
navigationBar.setItems([navItem], animated: false)
return navigationBar
}()
Navigation Bar helps to navigate between screens and the bar button can also help take certainactions. In our Add Book Screen, we will have a navigation Bar with two buttons, one to reset the fieldvalues and other is to save the entered book to our iCloud repository.
let navigationBar = UINavigationBar()
This will define the UI Navigation Bar object and assign it to a variable navigationBar.
navigationBar.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
We will always set the translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints of all UI Objects to false. This isrequired so that we can set the size and required constraints programmatically.
navigationBar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 171/255, green:189/255, blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
This will set the background color of the bar. Please refer to the UI Color reference section to learnhow to set color.
let navItem = UINavigationItem(title: "Add a Book")
We are creating a UINavigationItem Object which can hold a left and right action button. Theconstructor takes the title to be displayed on the Navigation Bar.
The next section will create two navigation items and set the items on the Navigation Bar.
let resetSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize:15, weight: .black)
UIImage symbol configuration is set with image configuration with size 15 and color black.
let resetImage = UIImage(systemName: "arrowshape.turn.up.left.fill",withConfiguration: resetSymbolConfiguration)
We are defining an UI Image for the Reset button. iOS provides a list of system-defined icons. We areusing the icon arrowshape.turn.up.left.fill and applying the symbol configurations for size and color.

--- Page 119 ---
let resetItem = UIBarButtonItem(image: resetImage, landscapeImagePhone:resetImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action:#selector(resetButtonAction))
We are now assigning the image we created on a UI Bar Button. If a user clicks on it, it will call thefunction resetButtonAction ( The system event is Touch Up Inside). The following three lines are nowrepeated for the save button.
let saveSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 20,weight: .black)
let saveImage = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill", withConfiguration:saveSymbolConfiguration)
let saveItem = UIBarButtonItem(image: saveImage, landscapeImagePhone:saveImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action:#selector(SaveButtonAction))
navItem.rightBarButtonItem = saveItem
The saveItem we defined before is assigned to the right Bar Button Item of the navigation Item.
navItem.leftBarButtonItem = resetItem
the resetItem we defined before is assigned to the left Bar Button Item of the navigation Item
navigationBar.setItems([navItem], animated: false)
As the final setup, we will assign the navItem to the Navigation Bar.
return navigationBar
The object is returned to be displayed on the screen.
The reset button and Save button functions defined as part of the navigation bar item aredescribed in Table 5-5. All user-defined functions precede with @objc followed by thesystem-defined func for functions.
Table 5-5UI Navigation Bar Button Method Definition
@objc func resetButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
}
@objc func saveButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
}
saveButtonAction function is called when the user clicks the Save Button on the Tab bar. Similarly,resetButtonAction function is called when the user clicks the Reset Button on the Tab bar. Please note,the functions are currently a shell, the code for the functions we will discuss in the subsequentsections.
Table 5-6UI Text Field
UITextField
Beautifying Strings using NSAttributedString
UI Text Field helps in getting data Input from the user. NSAttributedString can be used to beautifyDisplay Texts on Screen. Attributed Text can be applied to any UI Object that can display text (UILabel,

--- Page 120 ---
UITextfield, UIButton, etc.).
Next, we are going to define the Text Field to allow users to enter book-related information.The code is defined in Table 5-7.
Table 5-7UI Text Field Definition and Methods
Code to Create Text Field
//MARK: - Define UI Screen Objects
// is for commenting. Anything we write after // will not be read by the compiler
Mark: are good ways to demark code into sections and provide a textual reference to what the sectionis about. In our case, this section is about defining screen Objects.
private let bookTextField:UITextField = {
let textField = UITextField()
textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "Enter TheBook Name", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])
textField.textColor = .white
return textField
}()
1. private let bookTextField:UITextField = {
searchTextField is the variable name of type UITextField. We defined this variable as let because itwon’t be replaced with a new value in the subsequent code. The variable is also private because it willbe only referred to in the Add Book View Controller file only. Throughout the Add Book Viewcontroller file, we will refer to the book Text Field as bookTextField. Notice the code has ={ the opencurly brace is to set properties for the text field as described in the following:
2. let textField = UITextField()
we are defining a textfield variable. All the properties will be set to the textField variable, and towardthe end of the definition, we will return the bookTextField variable for display on the view controller.
3. textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
We will always set the translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints of all UI Object to false. This isrequired so that we can set the size and required constraints programmatically.
4. textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
this is to set the background color of the Text field to Gray and border style to rounded Rectangle
5. textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "EnterBook Name", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])

--- Page 121 ---
Attribute Placeholder property provides a prompt text for users to be aware of what they need to fill.NSAttributedString constructor helps to design the text appearance (Size, color, font, style). In thisexample, we give the prompt text to enter a book name and give the foreground a white color.
6. textField.textColor = .white
the color of the text is set to white as the background is gray
7. return textField
}()
The textField is returned, the curly bracket is closed, and function is completed [()]
private let authorTextField:UITextField = {
let textField = UITextField()
textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "EnterAuthor Name", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])
textField.textColor = .white
return textField
}()
private let genreTextField:UITextField = {
let textField = UITextField()
textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "EnterGenre", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])
textField.textColor = .white
return textField
}()
private let statusTextField:UITextField = {
let textField = UITextField()
textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "EnterStstus (Read/Reading/Currently Read", attributes:[NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor: UIColor.white])

--- Page 122 ---
textField.textColor = .white
return textField
}()
This section is the same as the previous, where we have defined the author, genre, and status textfields.
To draw the UI Objects, we need to set the object Anchors. Since this will be donemultiple times, we will define it once in a custom class called CommonFunctions.As shown in Figure 5-10, create a Cocoa Touch Class called CommonFunctions ofsubclass type NSObject.
Figure 5-10Create Common Function Class
We will now add a function which can help anchor the UI Objects on the screen. Thefunction is public and is at class level. The details are in Table 5-8.
Table 5-8UI Object Alignment on Screen Function
func setFieldLayout(mainField:Any, constraintField:Any, topAnchor:CGFloat, leftAnchor: CGFloat, rightAnchor: CGFloat,heightAnchor: CGFloat){
(mainField as AnyObject).topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:(constraintField asAnyObject).topAnchor, constant:topAnchor).isActive = true
(mainField as AnyObject).leftAnchor.constraint(equalTo:(constraintField asAnyObject).leftAnchor, constant:leftAnchor).isActive = true
(mainField as AnyObject).rightAnchor.constraint(equalTo:(constraintFieldas AnyObject).rightAnchor, constant:rightAnchor).isActive = true

--- Page 123 ---
(mainField asAnyObject).heightAnchor.constraint(equalToConstant:heightAnchor).isActive= true
}
The function setFieldLayout takes in six variables as described in the following::
• mainField – Object that needs to be positioned on the screen
• constraintField – Object which will be used as a reference object for anchoring
• topAnchor – Space from top of the screen to the Object
• leftAnchor – space from the left of the screen to the Object
• rightAnchor – space from the right of the screen to the Object
• heightAnchor – height of the object
Notice that input variables mainField and ConstraintField is of type Any. This is because we can sendany UI Object to the function which can then be typecast to the respective UI object types.
(mainField as AnyObject).topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:(constraintField as AnyObject).topAnchor,constant:topAnchor).isActive = true
The passed variable mainField is typecast to AnyObject (for example an UI Text Field or UI TableView)
topAnchor is a property of UI Object. The topAnchor variable has a constraint function, which takestwo variables – the Top Anchor object it will be constrained to, and the Top Anchor value. We will makeit active by setting the isActive property of the constraint object to true. (If it is the first object, it willbe constrained to the view, or it could be constrained in relation to the object hierarchy. For instance, ifwe have the Author Name as main Field then the constraint field will be Book Name, as the AuthorName input text field comes after the book name text field).
We will repeat this for left, right, and height Anchor.
Notice, for height Anchor, we don’t need to put a constraint, as the height of the object is not dependenton any other object in the layout.

--- Page 124 ---
The code defined in Table 5-9 is for defining variables for AddBookVIewController class.The variables defined here will be visible across the class functions.
Table 5-9Class Level Variable for Accessing Functions Defined in CommonFunctions
//MARK: - Class Variables
let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
To access the functions and variables defined in CommonFunctions class, we are defining a class levelvariable called commonFunctions(Notice Swift is case sensitive). commonFunctions will have the twofunctions, one for displaying the object on the screen and the second function to show a spinner whenwe call iCloud APIs (iCloud APIs are asynchronous and we need to wait for the call back function fromiCloud to know the API is completed).
We are now going to write a custom function which will draw the screen for us. We willname the function as drawInputScreen(). This will be a class level function and will be calledwhen the class will load first (ViewWillAppear – Please refer to Life Cycle Methods tounderstand the lifecycle function hierarchy). The code details are in Table 5-10.
Table 5-10UI Text Field Definition and Methods
func drawInputScreen(){
view.addSubview(addNavigationBar)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: addNavigationBar,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 40)
view.addSubview(bookTextField)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTextField,constraintField: addNavigationBar, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: 40)
view.addSubview(authorTextField)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: authorTextField,constraintField: bookTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0,rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 40)
view.addSubview(genreTextField)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: genreTextField,constraintField: authorTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0,rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 40)
view.addSubview(statusTextField)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: statusTextField,constraintField: genreTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0,rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 40)
}
Every ViewController has a default UI view on which the UI Objects are layered.

--- Page 125 ---
view.addSubview(addNavigationBar)
To add an UI Object to another object, there is a built-in function called addSubview. The functionstake the object to be added as an input parameter. In the preceding line of code, the navigation bar isadded to the view.
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: addNavigationBar,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 40)
Notice we are calling the setFieldLayout from the CommonFunctions class using the variablecommonFunctions. In the preceding statement, we are defining the coordinates of the navigation barin relation to the default view. The view will be 60 pixels from the top, covering the entire screenwidth (notice left and right anchor as 0) and the height of the navigation bar at 40 pixels.
view.addSubview(bookTextField)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTextField,constraintField: addNavigationBar, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: 40)
The preceding two statements add the book Input Text Field below the navigation bar. Notice theconstraint field this time is the navigation bar, and it is separated by 60 pixels. We are leaving 5 pixelsfrom the left and the right.
The Author, Genre, and Text Field are added to the screen in a similar way. Please note how theconstraint field is changing for each one of them. Also note, the right and left anchor are set to zerobecause we want all fields to be of the same size as Book Text field, as these fields are taking Book TextField as constraint.
The code defined in Table 5-11 is the lifecycle method, which will execute first as theAdd Book screen opens.
Table 5-11Lifecycle – View Did Load
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
drawInputScreen()
}
viewDidLoad method is the first method called when the view is loaded. We are calling thedrawInputScreen method from here, as we want to display the screen elements first.
Running the ProgramIf all steps are followed properly, the simulator would look like Figure 5-11.

--- Page 126 ---
Figure 5-11Simulator – Add a Book

--- Page 127 ---
Figure 5-12Simulator – Add a Book Validation – Multiple Option

--- Page 128 ---
Saving the Book Record in iCloudNow that we have designed the Add book screen, we will save the record to the Book entitydefined in the iCloud database Genie.
Data Validation Is an Important StepBefore saving the record, we need to perform some basic validation. We want to make surethere is some value for all the text fields. The validation will be triggered when the userattempts to save the book record. The code in Table 5-12 provides the details.(Recall thefunction saveActionButton attached to the Save Button on the tab bar.) We will perform thefollowing action:
1. Check if the text fields are empty.  2. If so, put a placeholder text indicating field cannot be blank.  3. To add emphasis on the message, we will make the border of the text field red wherevalue is blank.  
4. And put the focus back on the first empty text field, forcing the user to enter value.  
Table 5-12Saving Book Record
1. @objc func saveButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
2. var canSave:Bool = true
3. if(bookTextField.text == ""){
bookTextField.placeholder = "Book Name cannot be blank"
bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
bookTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
bookTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
canSave = false
4. }else{
bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
5. }
6. if(authorTextField.text == "")
7. {
authorTextField.placeholder = "Author Name cannot be blank"
authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
authorTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
authorTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
canSave = false
8. }else{

--- Page 129 ---
authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
9. }
10. if(genreTextField.text == ""){
genreTextField.placeholder = "Genre cannot be blank"
genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
genreTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
genreTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
canSave = false
11. }else{
genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
12. }
13. if(statusTextField.text == ""){
statusTextField.placeholder = "Status cannot be blank"
statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
statusTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
statusTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
canSave = false
14. }else{
statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
15. }
16. if(canSave){
saveBook()
17. }
18. }
1. @objc func saveButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
This is the function which gets called when the user clicks on the save button.
2. var canSave:Bool = true
This is a function level variable which is set to false if any of the field is left blank
3. if(bookTextField.text == ""){
This statement compares if the book text field is blank. If it is blank, the following five statements areexecuted
bookTextField.placeholder = "Book Name cannot be blank"
Set the placeholder value of the book text to a custom text
bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
We are setting the Text field border to size 2 to make it promptly visible
bookTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5

--- Page 130 ---
The text field corner radius will give the rectangular text box a nice, rounded curve
bookTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
We are setting the border color to Red to make it standout
canSave = false
Setting the canSave Boolean variable to false, flagging we cannot save the record yet
4. }else{
If enclosure, and the else part of the if (when the text field is not blank)
bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
setting the border width to zero so that it returns to the original status
5. }
Else statement enclosure.
line 6 to 14, it is the repeat validation for other fields. Notice that each text field validation is aseparate block of if statement instead of an else if. This is because we want validation to be checkedfor all fields at once and let the user know of all possible fields that need value. If we use else if, thenthe checking will be progressive, or in other words, even if all fields are blank, it will show Book doesnot blank first and when you save again with Book name entered, it will show author did not find thenext time around.
6. if(authorTextField.text == ""){
authorTextField.placeholder = "Author Name cannot be blank"
authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
authorTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
authorTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
canSave = false
7. }else{
authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
8. }
9. if(genreTextField.text == ""){
genreTextField.placeholder = "Genre cannot be blank"
genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
genreTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
genreTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
canSave = false
10. }else{
genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
11. }
12. if(statusTextField.text == ""){
statusTextField.placeholder = "Status cannot be blank"
statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2

--- Page 131 ---
statusTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
statusTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
canSave = false
13. }else{
statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
14. }
15. if(canSave){
If canSave is set to true, it means all fields have the needed values and we can save the book
16. saveBook()
Functions to save the book
17. }
      }
Table 5-13Text Field Validation User Interaction
textField.addTarget(self, action: #selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin),for: .editingDidBegin)
Add the preceding line to all the four Text field Definitions. Notice that the same function will be calledevery time user starts.
• .editingDidBegin is a built-in function of the text field.
• addTarget allows to add custom method for certain UI Actions.
• #selector allows defining a custom function for the action. In our case, it is textFieldEditingDidBegin.We need to define this function to achieve the desired behavior.
//MARK: - Text Field Functions
@objc func textFieldEditingDidBegin(sender: UITextField){
sender.layer.borderWidth = 0
}
This is our custom method and is called when the user starts typing on any of the text fields. Thesender has the reference to the Text Field, and we can use it to set the border width to zero.
Note There are other validations we need to do, for example, if the book already existsin the database, we do not want to save it again. We will do this validation as part ofsaving.
Run the program. You will see screens like how it is shown in Figure 5-12.In the current validation, the red border doesn’t go away even after providing a valueuntil the user clicks on the save button. Aesthetically, it doesn’t appear right. The code inTable 5-13 helps to solve that problem. The steps are as follows:
Text Fields have a built-in action called When Begin Editing. This is called when the userstarts typing.

--- Page 132 ---
We will define this function for all the four-text fields and, in the body of the function, wewill make the border width of the text field to zero.
Create a Database Function FileCreate a Cocoa Touch file called DatabaseFunctions of type NSObject. This file will houseall the functions required to interact with the Genie database.
Preparation Before Saving the BookData ClassWe will define a Book class which will mimic the Book Class we created in the iCloud. Thisclass we will define in the DatabaseFunctions file as a class level object. Code is defined inTable 5-14.
Table 5-14Book Class Definition
Class Book{
var bookname:String!
Var authorname:String!
Var genre:String!
Var status:String!
}
Referencing Database ClassIn the AddBookViewController class, we will create an object of the classDatabaseFunctions so that we can reference the objects and functions to save the book. Wewill also create an object called book of class Book (Book is a custom class defined inCommonVariables Class. We will learn it later in the book). This is where we will store thebook details, as shown in Table 5-15.
Table 5-15Class Level Variables
let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
let book = DatabaseFunctions.Book()
Define GroupIn the DatabaseFunctions class define a dispatch group and a Queue. We will need thisbecause all calls to the iCloud CRUD functions (create, query, update, and delete) areasynchronous. So, when we call these functions, we would be notified when the job is done(as iCloud is a repository located outside of your App). The Dispatch group helps us tohandle the notification and the queue will be defined to know where it should be notifiedwhen the work is done. Define this at the class level. So, all functions can use it. See the codein Table 5-16 for details.
Table 5-16Asynchronous Queue Definition

--- Page 133 ---
let group = DispatchGroup()
let syncQueue = DispatchQueue(label: "com.domain.app.sections")
Dispatch Group and Dispatch Queue are defined. Please note, label is a custom label for uniqueidentification.
Function to Save Book RecordCloudkit Library as shown in Table 5-17
Table 5-17Import Cloudkit
import CloudKit
Import Cloudkit library to access all iCloud built-in methods in the DataBaseFunctions class.
Save the Book to iCloud – code in Table 5-18.
Table 5-18Code to Save Book Record
func saveBook(book:Book){
let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "_defaultZone")
let privateDatabase = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
let ckRecordID = CKRecord.ID(zoneID: ckRecordZoneID.zoneID)
let aRecord = CKRecord(recordType: "Book", recordID: ckRecordID)
aRecord["bookname"] = book.bookname
aRecord["authorname"] = book.authorname
aRecord["genre"] = book.genre
aRecord["status"] = book.status
privateDatabase.save(aRecord, completionHandler: { (record, error) ->Void in
DispatchQueue.main.async {
if let error = error {
print(error)
}
else{
self.syncQueue.async {
self.group.leave()
}
}
}
})
}

--- Page 134 ---
1. func saveBook(book:Book){
This is a custom function to save the Book data entered by the user. It takes an object of type Bookclass.
Row 2 to 5 is getting access to the custom Shared Zone of the Cloud Database for the user (PrivateDatabase). Please note, a custom zone is required for record sharing with other users, which we willlearn later. By default, iCloud creates a default zone, which cannot be used for sharing records.
2. let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "_SharedZone")
We are defining the zone ID where we are going to store our book record. SharedZone is a customname.
3. let privateDatabase = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
Reference to the user default private database is stored in the privateDatabase variable. Please noteevery user will have its own database which no one else can see. iCloud knows about it from the userApple ID.
4. let ckRecordID = CKRecord.ID(zoneID: ckRecordZoneID.zoneID)
We are now defining a Record ID to hold our book pointing to the Shared Zone
5. let aRecord = CKRecord(recordType: "Book", recordID: ckRecordID)
The record ID is now pointing to Book Record Type, which, if you recall, we created during iCloudsetup. We will use this record to store our book details.
6. aRecord["bookname"] = book.bookname
The function is called with a book object. We are now assigning the book object book name value tothe record with the field “bookname”. Please note, the name of the field should exactly match to thefield name we provided while creating the book. Steps 7, 8, and 9 is a repeat of Step 6 for other bookfields.
7. aRecord["authorname"] = book.authorname
8. aRecord["genre"] = book.genre
9. aRecord["status"] = book.status
10. privateDatabase.save(aRecord, completionHandler: { (record, error) ->Void in
recall we have the variable privateDatabase pointing to the User Private Database in iCloud. We arecalling the built-in save method to save our record. Save takes the CKRecord Type (which in our caseis Book type) parameter and it has a completion handler. Please note, all iCloud functions areasynchronous. So, when the database is done with the work, it returns either a record it saved (ifsuccessful) or an error message. The parameter record and error are to capture the same.
11. DispatchQueue.main.async {
On the main thread of the Dispatch Queue, the async routine will invoke when the work is done.
12. if let error = error {
we are comparing if there is any error.
13. print(error)
If so, we will print the error on the console
14. }
15. else{

--- Page 135 ---
16. self.syncQueue.async {
or else, we will notify the waiting process (from where our custom saveBook() will be called)
17. self.group.leave()
group leave will notify the waiting function (from where our custom saveBook() will be called)
18. }
19. }
20. }
21. })
22. }
Setting Value Before Calling saveBookIn the view controller, AddBookViewController method saveButtonAction (when the savebutton is clicked, this function is called), we will add the text as shown in Table 5-19 whenthe canSave (it is a variable of Boolean type) is set to true (when all text fields are notblank).
Table 5-19Setting Book Values
1. if(canSave){
2. book.bookname = bookTextField.text!
3. book.authorname = authorTextField.text!
4. book.genre = genreTextField.text!
5. book.status = statusTextField.text!
6. saveBook()
7. }
1. if(canSave){
When CanSave is true, all text fields have some value
2. book.bookname = bookTextField.text!
setting the book object book name property to the book Text Field value
3. book.authorname = authorTextField.text!
setting the book object Author Name property to the Author Text Field value
4. book.genre = genreTextField.text!
setting the book object Genre property to the Genre Text Field value
5. book.status = statusTextField.text!
setting the book object Status property to the Status Text Field value
6. saveBook()
calling the saveBook Function
7. }

--- Page 136 ---
Call the Save Book MethodWe will now call the function saveBook in the DatabaseFunctions. Please note, saveBookmust be called in an asynchronous fashion. This function is defined in theAddBookViewController file. The code details are in Table 5-20.
Table 5-20Calling the Save Book Functions
1. fileprivate func saveBook(){
2. databaseFunctions.group.enter()
3. databaseFunctions.saveBook(book:book)
4. databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
5. print("Record Saved")
6. }
7. }
1. fileprivate func saveBook(){
fileprivate before a func makes it only accessible in the defined file. Please note, this is the localsaveBook() function to the file AddBookViewController.swift
2. databaseFunctions.group.enter()
we are accessing the group variable from the DatabaseFunctions file using the reference variabledatabaseFunctions. enter() allows us to enter the wait loop. It will wait until it is notified.
3. databaseFunctions.saveBook(book:book)
After entering the wait, we are now calling the DataBaseFunctions saveBook method. Notice it takesBook as a variable. Also note, we have stored the class instance book with all required values when thesave button was clicked.
4. databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
When iCloud returns to the main queue, it will notify the group object. At this time, we can do anypost-saving activities.
5. print("Record Saved")
For now, we are simply printing Record Saved on the console.
6. }
7. }
Post Save
UIAlertController
Alerts are a quick way to display contextual information based on certain actions that a user performs.Alert can also show action buttons and, based on what user chooses, a certain function can be executed.
When you run the program now and save a book, the screen shows all the last enteredbook data, except printing “Record Saved” on the console. After saving, we would do thefollowing:

--- Page 137 ---
Show an Alert informing the user the record is saved.Clean the Fields, allowing user to add new Book Record.Bring the focus to the first field – Book Name.
We are adding code after the book is saved. The highlighted portion in Table 5-21 is whatwe replaced from the book save function.
Table 5-21Post Save Code
fileprivate func saveBook(){
databaseFunctions.group.enter()
databaseFunctions.saveBook(book:book)
databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Save Alert", message:"Book '\(self.book.bookname!)' is Saved", preferredStyle: .alert)
// Create the actions
let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
UIAlertAction in
self.tabBarController?.selectedIndex = 0
}
// Add the actions
alertController.addAction(okAction)
self.resetField()
// Present the controller
self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
}
}
1. let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Save Alert", message:"Book '\(self.book.bookname!)' is Saved", preferredStyle: .alert)
We are creating an Alert to display the message “Book is Saved” Message.
2. // Create the actions
3. let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
We need to create an action button on the alert window – this is the OK Button. We will only have onebutton for this alert, as this is information-only alert window.
4. UIAlertAction in
This is inline code. If we need to take any action, we will take it here. For our window, we are nottaking any action, so it is blank.
5. }

--- Page 138 ---
6. // Add the actions
7. alertController.addAction(okAction)
Adding the action to the Alert object.
8. // Present the controller
9. self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
presenting the alert on the view.
10. self.resetField()
This is a custom function to reset the field value (Defined in the next section)
Run the program. You will see a screen, as shown in Figure 5-13, after the book is saved.
Figure 5-13Simulator - Saving Book
Reset FieldWhen the user clicks the reset button on the navigation bar, all data is removed, and the textfields show the placeholder texts. Consider this when you want to clear the fields withoutmanually going to every field to delete the words. Table 5-22 has the relevant code.

--- Page 139 ---
Table 5-22Reset Book Data
@objc func resetButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
resetField()
}
1. @objc func resetButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
resetButton function is defined for the navigation bar left button. This is the implementation of thesame
2. resetField()
This is a custom function to reset the field value
3. }
func resetField(){
bookTextField.text = ""
authorTextField.text = ""
genreTextField.text = ""
statusTextField.text = ""
bookTextField.becomeFirstResponder()
}
1. func resetField(){
Custom function definition
2. bookTextField.text = ""
Book Name Text Field is set to empty string
3. authorTextField.text = ""
Author Name Text Field is set to empty string
4. genreTextField.text = ""
Genre Text Field is set to empty string
5. statusTextField.text = ""
Book Status Text Field is set to empty string
6. bookTextField.becomeFirstResponder()
Making the Book Name Field the first Responder, which will bring the cursor to the Book Name TextField and bring up the keyboard.
7. }
SummaryThis chapter introduced many core concepts which will be your learning bedrock forbuilding iOS App. We learned about Tab View Screen allocation and transition, inputvalidation and user interactions. We also got introduced to CloudKit for storing our bookrecord Asynchronously to iCloud repository. After adding the necessary code for Adding a

--- Page 140 ---
Book to our Book Tracker repository, we learned how to test our application using iOSsimulator. iOS simulator is a great way to test form response on various models of iPhone.Now that we have books in our Book Tracker database, next we will learn aboutretrieving them from iCloud and displaying them on our App.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 141 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of SpringerNature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_6

--- Page 142 ---
(1)
6. Displaying the Book Records
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
In this chapter, we will learn about displaying the books we have stored inour Book Tracker repository. Following are the key functions we need toperform to achieve the same:
Create a View Controller for Displaying the Book records.Query the iCloud repository to retrieve all user books.Implement Table View to Display the books.
Setting Up Display View Controller
If you recall, we have set up a Tab View Controller with three tabs, “Display,”“Add Book,” and “Search.” We will use the first Tab to display our books, andto do that we need to create a UIViewController with the nameDisplayViewController. This is the same way how we created theAddViewController. For ease of reference, I am re-introducing the steps asfollows:Create the View Controller File for Display Book Screen
1. The code of every UI Screen must be linked to the UI Cocoa Touch Swiftfile. Go ahead and create a new file from the file menu, as shown inFigure 6-1.
 

--- Page 143 ---
Figure 6-1 Create View Controller
2. Select the Cocoa Touch class, as shown in Figure 6-2. 

--- Page 144 ---
Figure 6-2 Project Template
3. Give a name to the File. Though you can give any name, following anomenclature is a good Practice – I have named itDisplayBookViewController. Notice that the subclass isUIViewController and the language is Swift. The details of the screenis shown in Figure 6-3.
 

--- Page 145 ---
Figure 6-3 View Controller Options
4. Once done save the file in the project folder, as shown in Figure 6-4. 

--- Page 146 ---
Figure 6-4 File Saving Screen
Assigning the Display View Controller File inMain.storyboard
The next step is to assign the newly created Display View controller file tothe Display View Controller screen in Main.storyboard, as shown in Figure6-5.
1. Click on Main Storyboard in the project navigator.  
2. Select the Display Book View Controller. You can do that by clicking theview controller icon in the storyboard, which is the first icon on thescreen, as shown in the following.
 

--- Page 147 ---
Figure 6-5 Storyboard View Controller Assignment
3. In the Identity Inspector screen, enter the File name (in our case it willbe DisplayViewController) of the view controller. This way we haveassociated the View Controller file to the Display View ControllerScreen. The code we write on this file will be for this screen.
 

--- Page 148 ---
Query the Book Table
Before we can display the book on the Display View Controller screen, weneed to first retrieve the books we have saved to our iCloud database –Book. For querying the books, we need to use functions from the CloudKitframework. In the following code snippet, we are retrieving all saved books.Later we will also learn to query for a particular book.Like how we Saved the Book, all CRUD functions we will write in one file(DatabaseFunctions) – this increases modularity and confirms the Object-Oriented Programming.Write the piece of code as described in Table 6-1 to theDatabaseFunctions.
Table 6-1 Query Book Code Details
var books = [Book]()
1. var books = [Book]()
define a books variable of type Book which will hold all the books returned by ourbook query function (Definition of Book is in DatabaseFunctions Class)
func bookQuery() {
        let pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book," predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
           let book = Book()
            book.bookname = record["bookname"]
            book.authorname = record["authorname"]
            book.genre = record["genre"]
            book.status = record["status"]
            self.books.append(book)

--- Page 149 ---
        }
        operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self]
(cursor, error) in
            DispatchQueue.main.async {
                if let error = error {
                    print(error)
                }else {
                    self.syncQueue.async {
                        self.group.leave()
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
 1.  // MARK: – Retrieve All Books
Remarks to create a MarkUp block for the Book Query code. This is for betterreadability.
 2.  func bookQuery() {
This is the name of the functions that will hold book query functionalities.
 3.  let pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
NSPredicate is a functional part of the CloudKit framework, which is used to buildconditional statements. As we are retrieving all books, we are setting the Booleanvalue to true, indicating we need all books.
 4.  let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
CKQuery is a CloudKit function used to build the query. The constructor takes twovalues, the name of the record Type (Table where book is stored hence the nameBook – please refer to schema creation section in iCloud), and the predicate, whichwe have set up before to retrieve all records.
 5.  let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
Now, we are setting the query to the CKQueryOperation function
 6.  CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)

--- Page 150 ---
The operation we have set with the query is now added to the user private clouddatabase where the user schema exists. Currently, the query is sent asynchronouslyto the iCloud for execution. Please note the following statement will only be executedwhen the query returns to this thread. This is the reason why when we call thebookQuery() function we will put it in a wait loop.
 7.  operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
When iCloud returns, it will first land on the record fetched block. Notice the wordrecord which holds the individual book record (as per the Book table defined iniCloud Data Dictionary). As we loop through the fetched records, we can store it in alocal Book (Book is a custom class defined in DatabaseFunctions class, whichmimics the Book Table defined in the iCloud database) array for display purposes.
 8.  let book = Book()
we are creating a local instance of the Book class
 9.  book.bookname = record["bookname"]
storing the returned bookname to the local book.bookname variable
10.  book.authorname = record["authorname"]
storing the returned authorname to the local book.authorname variable
11.  book.genre = record["genre"]
storing the returned genre to the local book.genre variable
12.  book.status = record["status"]
storing the returned status to the local book.status variable
13.  self.books.append(book)
Now that we have the book information in the local variable book, we will add this toour class level books array. The loop will continue until all books are retrieved andstored.
14.  }
15.  operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self]
(cursor, error) in
when the previous fetch is complete, the query completion block is called. Noticeyou get the cursor to the record set (we will not use it in our code) and if there areany errors it will be stored in the error variable.
16.  DispatchQueue.main.async {
17.  if let error = error {

--- Page 151 ---
This statement stores the error returned from the asynchronous iCloud function intoa variable named error.
18.  print(error)
If the previous statement satisfies, it will print the error.
19.  }else {
20.  self.syncQueue.async {
We have defined a custom queue called syncQueue, on which we will wait for theasynchronous function to return.
21. self.group.leave()
And when it returns, we will leave the thread
22. }
23. }
24. }
25. }
Call the Query Book
The CloudKit function to retrieve the already created book records need tobe called when the Display View Controller opens. If you have noticed, theDisplay View controller is our first View. We need to use one of the Lifecyclemethods to call the function. I prefer placing it in viewDiDAppear, as thiswill be called whenever we tap on the Display Tab. Another important pointto note is the CloudKit functions are asynchronous, so, when we call thefunction, we need to wait for it to return. We do this using theDispatchGroup functions, which will allow us to enter the wait and getnotified when the function completes. Look at the code snippet asdescribed in Table 6-2:
Table 6-2 iCloud Query Book Code Details
import UIKit
class DisplayViewController: UIViewController,
UITableViewDelegate, UITableViewDataSource {
    // the two following variables are used to access the
common class functions and variables

--- Page 152 ---
    let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
1. let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
Defining a variable databaseFunctions as an instance of DatabaseFunctions classto access all CloudKit related functions
//MARK: - Book Query
    fileprivate func bookQuery(){
        databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        databaseFunctions.bookQuery()
        databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            self.setup()
            self.drawBookDisplay()
            self.bookTableView.reloadData()
        }
    }
 1.  fileprivate func bookQuery(){
defining a custom function bookQuery. fileprivate makes it only accessible withinthe class
 2.  databaseFunctions.group.enter()
We have defined a variable called group in DatabaseFunctions class of type,DispatchGroup enter will initiate the wait thread
 3.  databaseFunctions.bookQuery()
Now we will call the bookQuery functions from DatabaseFunction (we wrote inthe previous section), which will query the CloudKit database schema.
 4.  databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
this is the wait part of the DispatchGroup, when the child thread notifies the mainthread, the code in this block will be executed.
 5.  self.drawBookDisplay()
This is the function to display the table view, which we will discuss in the nextsection.
 6. }
 7. }

--- Page 153 ---
Table 6-3 UI Table Definition
UITable
Table Views are one of the most important UI Objects in the iOS toolkit. A table viewdisplays a collection of vertical rows where each row contains a collection ofinformation that is displayed on the screen. The table view is scrollable, allowing usersto scroll through a long list of content. Table view also allows grouping of content andshows the content in separate sections. Each displayed row is a table view cell, whichcan be customized to display any UI Object.
Create a Table View
Now that we have queried the Cloudkit table, next we need to display thevalue on the screen. Swift has a UIObject called Table View which we willuse for this purpose. Table View is one of the most important UI Objectsthat we need to learn to create iPhone Apps. The default Weather, StockTicker Apps are customized rendition of Table View. In the Core conceptssection, we will dedicate a section on Table View, its related functions, andhow to customize a table to create aesthetically aligned professionalapplications. For now, we will learn the basic table view setup to display allbooks on a one column table.Before we start, let us understand a few important aspects of table view.
Table View is a collection of table view cells.Each Table View Cell is a view which by default has a UI label. We cancustomize the table view cell to have any UI Object.Displaying Cell is a resource-expensive process; hence, by default, TableView is designed to repurpose cells when we scroll between values. Forexample, if we have a 100-row table and the screen at a time displaysonly ten cells, the Table View repurposes these ten cells to display thenext ten values as we scroll down or up. This is important to note,because if we do not repurpose the cells, the application will becomequite slow.Table View has many built-in functions, but there are two functionswhich require definition: numberOfRowsInSection – This lets the TableView know how many rows exist, and cellForRowAt – This will reiterateas many times as there are visible cells or number of rows, whichever islarger.

--- Page 154 ---
Let us now implement our Book table view to display the retrievedbooks.
Step 1: Define the Table Object
The code in Table 6-4 has the UI Objects we will need to display the queriedbooks from the iCloud repository.
Table 6-4 Display UI Object Code
private let bookTableView:UITableView = {
        let tableView = UITableView()
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints =
false
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
        return tableView
    }()
 1.  private let bookTableView:UITableView = {
bookTableView is a variable name of type UITableView. We are defining this as aprivate variable as the scope is only for this class
 2.  let tableView = UITableView()
Table View is created and stored in a variable called tableView. We will usetableView variable to set some initial properties of the table
 3.  tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints =
false
translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints property of UI Object allows us todefine our own constraints when set to false
 4.  tableView.backgroundColor = .white
Setting the table view background color to white. Note, we can set a custom colorusing the UIColor constructor
 5.  tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
We want the table to scroll to display all books as user scrolls up or down
 6.  return tableView

--- Page 155 ---
we are returning the tableView, so, when we use the bookTableView variable, all thesettings we have set will be available
 7. }()
Step 2: Extending the Table Delegate and Table DataSource
Table delegation and source are defined in Table 6-5.
Table 6-5 Table Delegate and Source Definition
class DisplayViewController: UIViewController,
UITableViewDelegate, UITableViewDataSource {
 1.  class DisplayViewController: UIViewController,
UITableViewDelegate, UITableViewDataSource {
We need to extend Table View Delegate and Data Source. This is required to enableall Table View functions. Please note, the moment you add the delegates, you willget an error stating, DisplayViewController does not conform to protocol“UiTableViewDataSource”. We need to add a minimum of two methods asexplained in steps 5 and 6.
Step 3: Setting the Table Delegate and Table Cell
It is a good practice to create a setup function and call it when the ViewAppears. In our current implementation, we need to do some initial setupof the table, setting up the bookTableView delegate and data source to self.Table view displays values in Table View Cell, we need to also define theTableView Cell (Note, Swift provides a default Table View Cell, which wewill use for now. Later we will learn about creating a custom Table ViewCell for custom table view appearances). Table 6-6 has the relevant codedetails.
Table 6-6 Table Delegate and Source Settings
func setup(){
        bookTableView.delegate = self
        bookTableView.dataSource = self

--- Page 156 ---
        bookTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self,
forCellReuseIdentifier: "book")
    }
 1.  //MARK: - Setup
 2.  func setup(){
Defining the custom setup functions
 3.  bookTableView.delegate = self
setting the bookTableView Delegate to the class so that we can perform all TableView functions
 4.  bookTableView.dataSource = self
setting the bookTableView Data source to the class so that we can perform allTable View functions
 5.  bookTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self,
forCellReuseIdentifier: "book")
Registering the table view to a default Cell Type and giving it an identifier name“book”. We will use this identifier to display table value in the cell
 6.  }
Step 4: Drawing the Table
Table 6-7 has the code for accessing the functions defined in the classCommonFunctions.
Table 6-7 Class Variable
let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
1. let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
Defining a variable commonFunctions as an instance of CommonFunctions classto access all custom common functions
Since we are drawing UI Objects using code, our next step is to draw thescreen with the table. Table 6-8 has the relevant code details for drawingthe Book Display screen.
Table 6-8 Table Delegate and Source Definition

--- Page 157 ---
func drawBookDisplay(){
        view.addSubview(bookTableView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTableView,
constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 100, leftAnchor: 0,
rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 400)
    }
 1.  //MARK: - Draw Book Display
 2.  func drawBookDisplay(){
drawBookDisplay is a custom function to display the book Table on the screen
 3.  view.addSubview(bookTableView)
adding the bookTableView to the main View
 4.  commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTableView,
constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 100, leftAnchor: 0,
rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 400)
calling the fieldLayout functions in commonFunctions file to set the book table onscreen. Notice we are setting it 100 pixels from the top covering the entire width,and height of the table set to 400 pixels.
 5.  }
Step 5: Implementing numberOfRowsInSection
This is a mandatory function for Table View display. This function makesthe table view aware of the number of rows to display. Table 6-9 has therelevant code details.
Table 6-9 Table Number of Rows in Section Details
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,
numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int {
        return self.databaseFunctions.books.count
    }
 1.  func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,
numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int {
this is built-in function signature which returns an integer value, which refers to thetotal number of rows in a table

--- Page 158 ---
 2.  return self.databaseFunctions.books.count
Recall from our Query Book functions, after the query, the result is persisted in thebooks variable in the databaseFunctions file.
 3.  }
Step 6: Implementing the cellForRowAt
This is also a mandatory function when we implement table view with datasource. This function will iterate for the number of visible rows on thescreen or the total number of rows, whichever is smaller. Please note this isimportant, for Table View reuses the cell to save memory, when the userscrolls down or up. Table 6-10 has the relevant code details.
Table 6-10 Table Cell Display Function Details
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt
indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
        let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:
"book", for: indexPath)
        cell.textLabel?.text =
self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bookname
 return cell
    }
 1.  func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt
indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
This is a built-in function signature which returns an UI table View Cell to displaycustom value (in our case book name). This will iterate for all visible rows
 2.  let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:
"book", for: indexPath)
we are defining a variable of type cell which uses the dequeueReusableCellproperty of tableView. Recall the identifier “book” we have set before in setup. Theidentifier name should match. It also takes the current indexPath. IndexPath hasreference to section and row (section we will learn later)
 3.  cell.textLabel?.text =
self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bookname

--- Page 159 ---
The system-defined cell reference has a default UI Textlabel. We are setting thatwith current book name. Notice the array reference indexPath.row – this will givethe current row number of the Book Array, iterating from the first row until thelast.
 4.  return cell
the function demands return of the cell for display
 5.  }
Step 6: Run the program
If you Run the program now, it will show you the books you have added. Ihave added a few books using our Add Display View Controller. Figure 6-6shows the simulator screen.

--- Page 160 ---
Figure 6-6 Simulator Displaying Books
Detailed Text Label
What if we want to display additional information on the table cell orbeautify the cell (change color, font, add image). The default stock App thatApple provides is a customized table view (shown in Figure 6-7). Thebackground color is black, and it has a stock Ticker and company name intwo rows, performance graph in between, and the current market pricewith green/red based on up or down on the right side of the cell.

--- Page 161 ---
Figure 6-7 Sample Screen
We will learn in Part II about customizing table views. Table View Cellby default allows us to add an additional detailed text label. In this section,we will learn about the same.In our example, we will show the author’s name as detailed text next tothe Book name. Replace the cellforRowAt code with the code in Table 6-11.
Table 6-11 Table Cell Display Detailed Text

--- Page 162 ---
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt
indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
        let cell = UITableViewCell(style:
UITableViewCell.CellStyle.subtitle, reuseIdentifier:
"book")
        cell.textLabel?.text =
self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bookname
        cell.detailTextLabel?.text =
self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].authorname
        return cell
    }
 1.  func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt
indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
This is the default function which draws each cell of the table (We have learned thisbefore)
 2.  //let cell =
tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "book", for:
indexPath)
We commented the previous dequeueresuablecell function of the tableview as weare going to replace it with the following statement, which is required for gettingthe detailed text along with the normal cell label
 3.  let cell = UITableViewCell(style:
UITableViewCell.CellStyle.value1, reuseIdentifier: "book")
We are calling the built-in table function UITableViewCell. There are many stylesavailable which will provide the layout of the cell. We use value1, and mentionedthe identifier which we have defined during table creation
 4.  cell.textLabel?.text =
self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bookname
There is no change to this line – this will display the book
 5.  cell.detailTextLabel?.text =
self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].authorname
This is a new addition which will display the detailed Text, which in our case is theauthor’s name.
 6.  return cell

--- Page 163 ---
And like before, we are returning the cell to draw on the table view display.
 7.  }
Figure 6-8 Display Book with Author Name
When we run our application, we now see the author’s name as shown in Figure 6-8.
Note Play around with the style and see how the cell layout changes.
Setting a Table Header
Our Table currently doesn’t have a header. Look at the stock Screen capture.It has a Heading called “Stocks and the current date”. Headers give morecontext about the data and increase readability. We will add a Header Called

--- Page 164 ---
“My Books”, and for that we need to add a few more built-in functions ofTable View. Add the Code in Table 6-12 to the table view function.
Table 6-12 Table Header Function Details
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,
titleForHeaderInSection section: Int) -> String? {
        return "My Books"
    }
 1.  func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,
titleForHeaderInSection section: Int) -> String? {
This is built-in table view function. Notice it returns a string, which is the Title forthe Table
 2.  return "My Books"
We returned a title called “My Books”
 3.  }

--- Page 165 ---
Figure 6-9 Book Display Screen with Header
Run the program and you will see the Title MyBooks on the top, as shown in Figure6-9. In Section II, we will learn how to beautify the table’s Header.
Summary
Another very important chapter, where we learned about core data displayfunctions. Table Views are the most convenient way to display data on aniOS App. We learned about the Table View setup, core table view functions,manipulating basic display labels in table view, and working with Table

--- Page 166 ---
Header. We also learned additional cloudkit functions to retrieve bookrecords asynchronously from the iCloud repository.In the next chapter, we will learn how to delete a book record from therepository.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 167 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_7
7. Deleting a Table Record
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
We now have a fully functional table view. We can add a book and we can display all bookswith their respective author’s name. In this chapter, we will learn how to delete a book record.From a user interface perspective, we will add the delete button to the table cell as a swipegesture. So, when the user swipes left it will show the delete option and clicking the buttonwill allow the user to delete the record.
Trailing Swipe FunctionSwift UI Table View provides a function for swipe function recognition. Add the code in Table7-1 to your Display View Controller File.
Table 7-1Trailing Swipe Function
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {
        let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style: .destructive, title:"Delete", handler: { (action, view, success) in
            self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
            self.databaseFunctions.deleteBook(bookname:self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bookname, authorname:self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].authorname)
            self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
                self.databaseFunctions.books.remove(at: indexPath.row)
                self.bookTableView.reloadData()
            }
        })
        deleteAction.backgroundColor = .red
        deleteAction.image = UIImage(systemName: "trash")
        return UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions: [deleteAction])
    }

--- Page 168 ---
1. func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {
This is a built-in function which implements the UI Gesture Swipe on the table cell. Notice it requiresUISwipeActionsConfiguration to be returned and provide reference to the concerned table view andthe cell details through the IndexPath variable.
2. let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style: .destructive, title:"Delete", handler: { (action, view, success) in
We are defining a variable deleteAction of type UIContextualAction style and we are setting it to bedestructive. This feature allows full swipe to automatically perform the first action (please note we aredefining only one action in this example. The swipe can have many actions). The handler is used forcompletion of the task. We will write our code for delete action in this block later.
3. })
Completion of the handler block of our delete action
4. deleteAction.backgroundColor = .red
setting the background color to Red
5. deleteAction.image = UIImage(systemName: "trash")
For the action display, we can either set a label or an image. In our code, we are setting this to thesystem trash icon
6. return UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions: [deleteAction])
Now that all references are done, we are returning the deleteAction as aUISwipeActionsConfiguration. Notice, the action is a collection of arrays. We can define multiple swipeactions and return it for display.
7. }

--- Page 169 ---
Figure 7-1Simulator Swiping Left
Swiping Left will give the delete button. But clicking will not do anything as our completion handler isempty. Next, we will write the code for delete. Figure 7-1 shows the simulator screen for Trailing leftdelete function.

--- Page 170 ---
Deleting book from CloudKit DatabaseWhen the user clicks the delete button, we need to call a routine to delete the selected bookfrom the database. We need to first search for the book we need to delete. We will perform aquery to find our book with the book and author name. Once we retrieve it, we will delete itfrom the repository. Please note, Cloudkit functions are asynchronous, and we need to ensurewe put the right rail guards of wait to ensure it functions properly.All our database functions are written in the DatabaseFunctions.swift file. Open the fileand add the code in Table 7-2.
Table 7-2DeleteFunction
func deleteBook(bookname: String, authorname: String){
        var taskRecords = [CKRecord.ID]()
        let pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname == %@ && authorname == %@",bookname, authorname)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
        operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
            taskRecords.append(record.recordID)
        }
        operation.queryCompletionBlock = { (cursor, error) in
        DispatchQueue.main.async {
            let modifyRecordsOperation =CKModifyRecordsOperation.init(recordsToSave: nil, recordIDsToDelete:taskRecords)
            modifyRecordsOperation.modifyRecordsCompletionBlock = { records,recordIDs, error in  DispatchQueue.main.async {
               if let error = error {
                   print(error)
               }else{
                   self.syncQueue.async {
                       self.deleteBookNotes(bookname: bookname)
                   }
               }
            }}
            CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(modifyRecordsOperation)

--- Page 171 ---
        }}
    }
1. func deleteBook(bookname: String, authorname: String){
A custom-defined function which takes two input parameters: book name and the author’s name.
2. var taskRecords = [CKRecord.ID]()
taskRecords variable will store all record IDs that are returned by the query for deletion. Note, theCloudkit identifies every record with a unique record ID.
3. let pred = NSPredicate(format: “bookname == %@ && authorname == %@”,bookname, authorname)
We are defining the condition for the query. Please make sure the field name is matching to what we havein the database.
4. let query = CKQuery(recordType: “Book”, predicate: pred)
We are preparing the query on the “Book” Type with the predicate we have defined before.
5. let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
The query variable is set as an operation
6. CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
And we execute it on the user’s private cloud database. Note, once this function is executed, we will be inwait mode (we get into wait mode when we call the deleteBook function).
7. operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
Once the Query is executed, it returns to the record Fetched Block, which is a predefined function ofCKOperations.
8. taskRecords.append(record.recordID)
We will loop through the result sets and add all record Ids to the custom defined taskRecords. Note,record is a variable of CK Record Type. As we loop through it, the record contains the record thatmatches the condition set forth in the predicate of the query.
9. }
Enclosure of the Record Fetched Block
10. operation.queryCompletionBlock = { (cursor, error) in
when the query is completed, it will come to the queryCompletionBlock. Note, this is asynchronous.Cursor has all references to record, and if the query is unsuccessful, the error variable will contain thefailure reasons.
11. DispatchQueue.main.async {
We will again wait on the main thread as it is an asynchronous operation.
12. let modifyRecordsOperation =CKModifyRecordsOperation.init(recordsToSave: nil, recordIDsToDelete:taskRecords)
Now we will use the CloudKit built-in function CKModifyRecordsOperation. Notice it takes in twoparameters an array of record IDs to save, and an array of record ID to be deleted. Since we do not wantto save any record, we supply nil as the parameter value for the first input parameter, and taskRecordsto the recordIDsToDelete parameter.
13. CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(modifyRecordsOperation)

--- Page 172 ---
Next, we execute it on the PrivateCloudDatabase
14. modifyRecordsOperation.modifyRecordsCompletionBlock = { records,recordIDs, error in DispatchQueue.main.async {
Once the method is complete, it returns to modifyRecordsCompletionBlock of our operations variablemodifyRecordsOperation.
15. if let error = error {
If there is an error in execution, this part will be executed. Notice error is an input variable.
16. print(error)
we will print the error on the console
17. }else{
If not, we have successfully deleted the record. The reference of the same, if needed, are in records andRecord IDs variable.
18. self.syncQueue.async {
the syncQueue on which we are waiting we will enter upon completion.
19. self.group.leave()
and leave the group. You will see where the control goes from here in the next section.
20. }
21. }
22. }}
23. }}
24. }
SummaryIn the last three chapters, we learned about the CRUD functions to manipulate iClouddatabases. In this chapter, we learned about deleting a book record. From a user displaystandpoint, we also learned a swipe function to display user-friendly actions.The next chapter will conclude Part I of our learning. The last chapter in Part I will focuson how to do conditional search and retrieve only those books that the user wants to see. Wewill also learn about dynamic search functions using Text Field built-in Edit functions.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 173 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_8
8. Searching Data Screen
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
This chapter will complete the basic structure of our App. Search is the third and last tab onour screen. Users will be able to search a book by its title or will be able to get all bookssearched by an author name. Also, the search will be dynamic, as the user types the letter itwill show the book name displayed.
Create the Search View ControllerAs we have done before for “Add Book” and “Display Book,” create a search view controlleras a cocoa touch class. We will name this file as SearchBookViewController of typeUIViewController. Once the file is created, under Identity Inspector, attach the file to theSearch tab in the Main.storyboard to the newly created search view controller.This completes the creation and setup of the Search View Controller screen. Next, wewill design our search screen.
Draw the Search ScreenOur search screen has two UI Objects, a text field, where users can enter either the book orauthor name to search and a table that will be dynamically built based on the search text.
Defining the UIObjectsTable 8-1 has the code for defining the UI Objects for the Search Screen.
Table 8-1UI Object
let searchTextField:UITextField = {
let textField = UITextField()
textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
textField.backgroundColor = .white
textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "SearchTerms", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.gray])

--- Page 174 ---
textField.textColor = .black
return textField
}()
let searchTableView:UITableView = {
let tableView = UITableView()
tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
tableView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 255/255, green: 253/255,blue: 208/255, alpha: 1)
tableView.layer.cornerRadius = 5
tableView.layer.borderWidth = 1
tableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
tableView.isScrollEnabled = false
return tableView
}()
Skipping the line-by-line explanation as we have gone through this before.
Setting up the table and the text fieldTable 8-2 has the code to set up the relevant table and text fields for showing the searchscreen.
Table 8-2Setting Up the Table and Text Fields
func setup(){
.delegate = self
searchTableView.dataSource = self
searchTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifiersearchTableView: "searchcell")
searchTableView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 202/255, green:202/255, blue: 202/255, alpha: 1)
searchTextField.delegate = self
searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingChanged), for: .editingChanged)
searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin), for: .editingDidBegin)
searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidEnd), for: .editingDidEnd)
}
1. func setup(){
Setup function will be called when the view controller is loaded

--- Page 175 ---
2. searchTableView.delegate = self
3. searchTableView.dataSource = self
4. searchTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"searchcell")
5. searchTableView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 202/255, green:202/255, blue: 202/255, alpha: 1)
Lines 2-4 we have explained before. If you need to learn more, please refer to previous section.
6. searchTextField.delegate = self
We need to set the delegate of the UI Text Field for search to the view controller. Please note we needto include the UITextFieldDelegate in the class definition
7. searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingChanged), for: .editingChanged)
For the Search Text Field, we need to add three built-in functions for drawing the dynamic tablepopulation behavior. We can add a function to a UI Object using addTarget method. It takes the targetobject (which is self), the name of the function as #selctor (a custom name is given which we need todefine later. In this statement, the custom method name is textFieldEditingChanged), and the controlevent, which is the system-defined name editingChanged is called when any change happens in thetext field. Every time the user types, this method is called.
8. searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin), for: .editingDidBegin)
editingDidBegin is a system-defined function that is called when the user first types.
9. searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidEnd), for: .editingDidEnd)
editingDidEnd is called when the system focus goes away from the text field
10. }
Note, the system will show error after defining the setup functions, as it requires thedelegates to be included, and custom functions for text fields and mandatory functions fortables to be defined.
Delegates to be includedThe code described in Table 8-3 defines the delegates and data source for the Search DisplayTable.
Table 8-3Table Delegate and Data Source Definition
class SearchBookViewController: UIViewController,UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource,UITextFieldDelegate {
Table View Delegate and Data Source and Text Field Delegate is included
Drawing the ScreenThis code in Table 8-4 will draw the text field on the screen
Table 8-4Drawing the Search Text Field on the Screen

--- Page 176 ---
func drawInputScreen(){
view.addSubview(searchTextField)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: searchTextField,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor: -5,heightAnchor: 40)
}
1. func drawInputScreen(){
custom function to draw the text field on the screen, to be called when form is loaded
2. view.addSubview(searchTextField)
adding the searchTextfield to the View
3. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: searchTextField,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor: -5,heightAnchor: 40)
Applying the relevant constraints to the Search Text Field
4. }
This code in Table 8-5 will draw the Table View on the screen. Initially, the table will beinvisible as this will be populated based on user search criteria.
Table 8-5Drawing the Table View on the Screen
func drawSearchTable(){
let tableHeight:CGFloat = CGFloat(databaseFunctions.books.count * 40)
view.addSubview(searchTableView)
commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: searchTableView,constraintField: searchTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: tableHeight)
}
1. func drawSearchTable(){
custom function to draw the search display table on the screen. To be called when user starts thesearch
2. let tableHeight:CGFloat = CGFloat(databaseFunctions.books.count * 40)
calculating the height of the table. Height of the row is 40, multiplying it with total number of bookssearched
3. view.addSubview(searchTableView)
adding the table to the View
4. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: searchTableView,constraintField: searchTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: tableHeight)
Applying the relevant constraints to the search result table
5. }

--- Page 177 ---
Query for All Records to Enable SearchThe function in Table 8-6 will be called when the view is loading. We want to get all theavailable records in an array and search the array. This is because querying the databaseevery time user types will be resource intensive and will make the application slow.
Table 8-6Query Construct for Searching the User Searched Books
fileprivate func bookQuery(){
databaseFunctions.group.enter()
databaseFunctions.bookQuery()
databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
self.setup()
self.drawInputScreen()
}
}
1. fileprivate func bookQuery(){
Custom function to Get all Books in a class level variable
2. databaseFunctions.group.enter()
Entering the group to wait on the main thread. It will be released after the query is completed
3. databaseFunctions.bookQuery()
this is the custom function defined in DatabaseFunctions file (will see the details in the next section)
4. databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
Waiting on the thread. This will be discussed in detail in the next section
5. self.setup()
Once the query is over, we will call the setup function defined before
6. self.drawInputScreen()
and draw the screen to have a Search Field for user to search
7. }
8. }
Querying the RepositoryIn the DatabaseFunctions Swift file, we will add a function to Query the Book Database forall records. Table 8-7 has the relevant code to query the repository.
Table 8-7Querying iCloud Repository for User Searched Books
func bookQuery() {
let pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)

--- Page 178 ---
let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
let book = Book()
book.bookname = record["bookname"]
book.authorname = record["authorname"]
book.genre = record["genre"]
book.status = record["status"]
self.books.append(book)
}
operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self] (cursor, error) in
DispatchQueue.main.async {
if let error = error {
print(error)
}else {
self.syncQueue.async {
self.group.leave()
}
}
}
}
}
1. func bookQuery() {
custom function to Query the Book Database
2. let pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
The predicate is for forming conditions, when set to true it will retrieve all records.
3. let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
Setting the query with the predicate
4. let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
Setting the Operations with the query
5. CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
The operation is now executed against the user private database
6. operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
This block will be called when the query returns from its asynchronous wait. The Record object willhave all book details. We are looping through each one of them

--- Page 179 ---
7. let book = Book()
we are defining a local Book object (Defined in the DatabaseFunctions class)
8. book.bookname = record[“bookname”]
storing the book name from the record variable to the book object
9. book.authorname = record[“authorname”]
storing the author from the record variable to the book object
10. book.genre = record[“genre”]
storing the genre from the record variable to the book object
11. book.status = record[“status”]
storing the status from the record variable to the book object
12. self.books.append(book)
appending the book record to the class level books object array
13. }
14. operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self] (cursor, error) in
when the query is completed, this block will be called – notice this is asynchronous
15. DispatchQueue.main.async {
16. if let error = error {
a. print(error)
if error in executing the query the error will be printed on the console
17. }else {
a. self.syncQueue.async {
on the syncQueue, we will start the asynchronous process
b. self.group.leave()
leave the wait on the group. This will return to the calling function of this bookQuery function
c. }
18. }
19. }
20. }
21. }
Text Field Events, Operations, and DisplaySo far, we have all the books stored in the books object of type Book. We have drawn ourscreen with a Text Field where users can input search terms and drawn a table (not visiblenow. Also, note we haven’t defined the mandatory table functions yet, so the code will showerror until we finish the next section). Text field has three events.
The first is when editing begins, this is the preparation event. We will copy the entirebook record to a temporary variable. This is because we will replace the main book

--- Page 180 ---
record object with the user search records.The second is when editing changes, this is called every time user types in the text field.Every partial string as user types will be searched against the temporary book objectcontaining the book records. If the string matches any part of the book or author, it isstored in the book object and the table is reloaded to display the record.The third and the last one is called when editing ends, this is for housekeeping; we willreplace the book object with the temporary book object so that it is reset to the entirebook list. This is required so that when the user searches next time, it has all the books tosearch from.
Defining Book Type VariableTable 8-8 has the variable definition details.
Table 8-8Variable Definition
var searchbooks = [DatabaseFunctions.Book]()
1. var searchbooks = [DatabaseFunctions.Book]()
Define this variable of type Book (Which we have defined in DatabaseFunctions class) at the SearchView Controller class level. This variable will hold all the books.
Editing BeginThe code in Table 8-9 is about Text Field Edit Begin Function.
Table 8-9Text Field Editing Begin Function
@objc func textFieldEditingDidBegin(sender: UITextField){
if(sender == searchTextField){
searchbooks = databaseFunctions.books
}
}
1. @objc func textFieldEditingDidBegin(sender: UITextField){
This function Is called when the Search Text field gets focus (become first responder).
2. if(sender == searchTextField){
The sender is an input variable which has the reference to the current focus text field. In this viewcontroller, we only have one text field, but it is always a good practice to check which Text field hastriggered the event. Also note, we made the association of the textfield to the event earlier in thesetup.
3. searchbooks = databaseFunctions.books
When editing begins, we are storing the book class object to another variable of type Book calledsearchBooks. As explained before, we use the books variable for content display on Table View andwe will replace its value with only the books that match the search criteria. Please note, the booksvariable is populated with all books when we query the database.
4. }
5. }

--- Page 181 ---
Editing ChangedThe code in Table 8-10 is about Text Field Edit Changed Function.
Table 8-10Text Field Editing Begin Function
@objc func textFieldEditingChanged(sender: UITextField) {
if(sender == searchTextField){
databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks
databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks.filter {
item in returnitem.bookname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
}
databaseFunctions.books.append(contentsOf: searchbooks.filter {
item in returnitem.authorname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
})
removeTableConstraints()
drawSearchTable()
if(databaseFunctions.books.count > 0){
searchTableView.isHidden = false
searchTableView.reloadData()
}else{
searchTableView.isHidden = true
}
}
}
1. @objc func textFieldEditingChanged(sender: UITextField) {
This function Is called every time user types any letter in the Search Text Field.
2. if(sender == searchTextField){
The sender is an input variable which has the reference of the current focus text field. In this viewcontroller, we only have one text field, but it is always a good practice to check which Text field hastriggered the event. Also note, we made the association of the textfield to the event earlier in the setup.
3. databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks
we are assigning what we have in searchbooks to the books variable. Note, book is used to displayand for first time both variables will have all the books.
4. databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks.filter {
Filter is a default function of arrays. We are going to filter from the searchbooks (which for the firsttime has all books). Filter can take an inline function, hence the opening curly bracket. The result isstored in the databaseFunctions.books, as this variable will be used to display the books in the tableview.

--- Page 182 ---
a. item in returnitem.bookname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
In the inline method, we are looping through each book object and checking if the bookname containsthe user inputted text phrase. Note that contains can search for phrases anywhere in the string. Also,notice lowercased, which converts all user inputted text and the book name to lowercase, as Search iscase sensitive. Both contains and lowercased are system-defined functions available for any stringliteral.
5. }
6. databaseFunctions.books.append(contentsOf: searchbooks.filter {
We are going to do the same filter again, but this time, it is for the author name. So that the user cansearch for a book and author name at the same time. Also note, we are appending as we are adding onthe search from the previous book name search
a. item in returnitem.authorname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
same as before, the only change is we are searching for the author 's name.
7. })
8. removeTableConstraints()
This is a custom function to remove the table from the screen as we will redraw the table with newrecords.
9. drawSearchTable()
This will redraw the Search Table.
10. if(databaseFunctions.books.count > 0){
After searching, all records are stored in the DatabaseFunctions class books object. The followingcode is executed if the books variable has records
a. searchTableView.isHidden = false
if the condition is true, we will make the Search Table View visible
b. searchTableView.reloadData()
reload the table to display the searched records
11. }else{
a. searchTableView.isHidden = true
if the condition is false, we will hide the Search Table View
12. }
13. }
14. }
Editing EndThe code in Table 8-11 is about Text Field Edit End Function.
Table 8-11Text Field Editing End Function
@objc func textFieldEditingDidEnd(sender: UITextField){

--- Page 183 ---
if(sender == searchTextField){
databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks
}
}
1. @objc func textFieldEditingDidEnd(sender: UITextField){
This function Is called when the editing ends on the Search Text Field (Resign First Responder)
2. if(sender == searchTextField){
The sender is an input variable which has the reference of the current focus text field. In this viewcontroller, we only have one text field, but it is always a good practice to check which Text field hastriggered the event. Also note, we made the association of the textfield to the event earlier in thesetup
a. databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks
when the editing on the search text field ends, we will store all books back in the “books” variable
3. }
4. }
Remove ConstraintsIf we need to redraw UI Objects, it is always a good practice to remove the constraints of theobjects; otherwise, we will get layout constraint errors. Table 8-12 has the relevant details.
Table 8-12Remove Constraints
func removeTableConstraints(){
searchTableView.removeConstraints(searchTableView.constraints)
searchTableView.removeFromSuperview()
}
1. func removeTableConstraints(){
custom functions to remove table constraint
2. searchTableView.removeConstraints(searchTableView.constraints)
First remove the table constraints
3. searchTableView.removeFromSuperview()
Then remove the table from its super view
4. }
Table FunctionsThe code in Tables 8-13 and 8-14 shows two functions which must be implemented fortable views. For this view, we will only need these two functions to be defined.
Table 8-13Table Row Display Functions

--- Page 184 ---
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section:Int) -> Int {
return databaseFunctions.books.count
}
1. func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section:Int) -> Int {
This is the built-in required function of Table View which lets the table view know how many rows tobe displayed. The number is returned as an integer value
2. return databaseFunctions.books.count
We are returning the total records of the books variable. Recall in the Text Editing Changed as wefilter based on search, we populate the “books” variable
3. }
Table 8-14Table Display Cell Functions
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
let cell = UITableViewCell(style: UITableViewCell.CellStyle.value1,reuseIdentifier: "searchcell")
let attrsList = [NSAttributedString.Key.font :UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 16),NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor : UIColor.black]
let attributedStringList = NSMutableAttributedString(string:databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bookname, attributes:attrsList)
cell.textLabel?.attributedText = attributedStringList
cell.detailTextLabel?.text =databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].authorname
return cell
}
1. func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
Built-in required table view function to render the row display. It returns a UI Table View Cell Object.
2. let cell = UITableViewCell(style: UITableViewCell.CellStyle.value1,reuseIdentifier: “searchcell”)
We are defining a UI Table View Cell. The first argument is style, we are using right and left align. Onright will be the main text (book name) on right it will be the detailed text (Author Name). The secondargument is an identifier of the cell. In the setup function, we gave our cell identifier name as“searchcell”
3. let attrsList = [NSAttributedString.Key.font :UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 16),NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor : UIColor.black]

--- Page 185 ---
Defining an attribute style with bold font 16 with color black.
4. let attributedStringList = NSMutableAttributedString(string:databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bookname, attributes:attrsList)
retrieving the current book name based on the “indexPath” object row variable, (This will loopthrough each available book in the array) and applying the attribute style we created in the previousstep
5. cell.textLabel?.attributedText = attributedStringList
setting the Left side Text with the attribute Text parameter, which can take attributed String
6. cell.detailTextLabel?.text =databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].authorname
setting the cell detailed text label with author name
7. return cell
returning the cell to display the record
8. }
Total number of rows to Display
Render the Display of each Cell in a Table ViewRun the program and it should show a screen like in Figure 8-1.
The first screen in Figure 8-1 is the display screen which shows all books.
The second screen in Figure 8-1 is the search screen. Notice the letter Typed is “T”, the result showsevery book or author that has the letter “T” or “t”.
The Third screen in Figure 8-1 we typed an e as well and it displays any book or author that has “te” or“Te” or “TE” or “tE”

--- Page 186 ---
Figure 8-1Simulator Search Screen
SummaryIn this chapter, we learned how to conditionally search iCloud records and display them forfurther action. We also learned how to make dynamic search work using the Text Field Editfunctions.This chapter concludes our Part I of the book. If you have reached here and triedeverything written so far, you have learned the following concepts:
Familiarized with Xcode and iCloud environment setupCreate UI Objects using CodeAbility to execute CRUD functions on iCloud RepositoryTable View manipulations for screen design and data displayCreate a basic App with core functionality
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 187 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of
Springer Nature 2023
S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloud
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_9

--- Page 188 ---
(1)
9. App Development Part 2
Overview
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
If you have reached here, congratulations. You have acquired
the required basic knowledge to create your own iPhone App
and now are some more advanced tasks. That is quite a feat,
and you should be proud to make it thus far. What you have
learned until now are the core skills, but not enough for
creating a professional-looking App. Besides, there are many
features that Xcode offers to make your App well integrated
into the Apple ecosystem. In this short chapter, we’ll review
what lies ahead in the remainder of the book and then start our
iCloud set-up.
What Lies Ahead . . .
Here is a brief outline of what we are going to learn:
First things first, we will uplift the UI. The UI we designed in
Part I was rudimentary, focusing more on the concepts and
less on the aesthetics. UI is a crucial part of any App design.
Ease of use, intuitive design, and right layout/color are some
of the important elements we need to give importance to
while developing an App. In this section, we will spend a

--- Page 189 ---
great deal of time making our Book Tracker App look
professional.
We will add new functionality. To make the Book Tracker App
usable, we need to enrich its function, and by doing that, you
will learn many coding nuances and tricks. Functions such as
editing a book, manipulating search results, display book by
status, validation if a book exists before saving to avoid
duplicate entry, auto populated lists for ease of selection,
incorporating date are some of the features we will add to
the App.
We will enable sharing: if you want a group of books to be
shared with another book tracker user, you can safely do it
using iCloud Share Database concept.
Notification Center: setting reminders. For example, we can
set a reminder to display a book to read on a particular date
and time on our iPhone notification screen.
Test Flight: when your App is ready to be released, you may
like to do a closed group beta testing; Test Flight will allow
you to enable the same.
Publishing an App: finally, once ready, you can push the App
to the App Store for Apple review and approval.
iCloud Setup
Before we begin designing our App, let us go ahead and define
the tables to persist our data. We will need the following two
tables:
Table
Name
Description

--- Page 190 ---
Table
Name
Description
Book This will store all book records ( This was explained in
Part I)
Booknotes This table will store book notes by for each relevant
Book
Figure 9-1 shows the Book table attributes and indexes
(indexes are important for enabling querying, sorting, and
searching).
Figure 9-1 Book Table Attributes and Indexes
The Book notes table shown in Figure 9-2 will have the
following attributes and indexes (indexes are important for
enabling querying, sorting, and searching).


--- Page 191 ---
Figure 9-2 Book Notes Attributes and Indexes
Summary
This chapter provided us with an introduction to Part II of our
App development journey. The chapter outlined everything we
would learn in the next 12 chapters. In the next part of our App
creation journey, we would need an additional table, called
Book Notes, to persist all notes about a book in iCloud
repository – the chapter provided the details of the Book Notes
table.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 192 ---
Part II
Overview
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 193 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_10
10. Redesigning the Display Screen
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
In this chapter, we will redesign the screen to uplift the UI, as shown in Figure 10-1.
Figure 10-1Simulator Screen Comparison

--- Page 194 ---
The blocks on the Top will show the total books available by reading status. The block showsan icon, a reading status title, and the total count. Following immediately, we have all booksdisplayed nicely with customized cells. We will have an option of making a book Favorite; insuch a case, it will be shown under the favorite book list below the books by status block. Also,note we have added a new Tab bar icon “Shared Books”, which will show books shared byothers. We will now learn how to create this screen. The new concepts we will learn are asfollows:
Manipulating ViewsUI Image View controlCustomizing table cells

--- Page 195 ---
Redesigning the UI of the Display Book ScreenInitial SetupExecute the following steps. You can refer to Part I for more details on how to execute thefollowing steps:
We will rewrite the DisplayViewController. Instead of deleting the old file, create a new viewcontroller and name it as BooksViewController.Go to main storyboard, and for the Display View Controller re-associate the class toBooksViewController in the Custom Class Property tab.
Defining UI Objects for the Top ViewsEach top block contains four elements, an UI View for defining the block frame, an UI ImageView to display the icon for the block, a UI title label for the text, and another UI Text label fordisplaying the count. Table 10-1 has the relevant code details.
Table 10-1UI Objects
lazy var readButton:UIButton = {
        let uiButton = UIButton()
        uiButton.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        uiButton.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        uiButton.layer.borderWidth = 2
        uiButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.blue.cgColor
        uiButton.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        uiButton.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        uiButton.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        uiButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(readButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return uiButton
    }()
   let readImageView: UIImageView = {
      let theImageView = UIImageView()
      theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "note.text")
      theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
      return theImageView
   }()
   let readTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4

--- Page 196 ---
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .right
      return label
   }()
   let readDigitLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .right
      return label
   }()
1. Lazy var toBeReadButton:UIButton = {
2. let uiButton = UIButton()
3. uiButton.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
4. uiButton.layer.cornerRadius = 5
5. uiButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
6. uiButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
7. uiButton.layer.shadowRadius = 5
8. uiButton.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
9. uiButton.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
10. uiButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(tobeReadButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
11. return uiButton
12. }()
This first block defines an UIButton object for the first block (readButton). Notice the border Width is setto 2 (higher than the other block buttons), and the border color is set to blue. As this is the first view, wewant to make it standout to show all current displays of books with status “Read”. Also, there is a Touch UpInside button action, so when user clicks the button, the table view is refreshed to show only books whichare read
  1. let readImageView: UIImageView = {
  2. let theImageView = UIImageView()
  3. theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "note.text")
  4. theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
  5. return theImageView
  6. }()
Image View is to display the Icon to represent the Book. We have use System Image, we can also putcustom image drawn using tools such as Adobe and GIMP

--- Page 197 ---
  7. let readTextLabel:UILabel = {
  8. let label = UILabel()
  9. label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
10. label.backgroundColor = .white
11. label.numberOfLines = 4
12. label.textColor = .black
13. label.textAlignment = .right
14. return label
15. }()
UI Label for the title of the Block16. let readDigitLabel:UILabel = {
17. let label = UILabel()
18. label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
19. label.backgroundColor = .white
20. label.numberOfLines = 4
21. label.textColor = .black
22. label.textAlignment = .right
23. return label
24. }()
Another UI Label for showing the total counts in the “Read Category”
The code in Table 10-2 is a repeat of the previous block to define the next two top viewblocks to show Books Currently Reading and Book To be Read in the future. Please note, thesystem icons are changing, and the view color is set to Gray.
        lazy var readingButton:UIButton = {
        let uiButton  = UIButton()
        uiButton.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        uiButton.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        uiButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        uiButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        uiButton.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        uiButton.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        uiButton.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        uiButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(readingButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return uiButton
   }()
   let readingImageView: UIImageView = {

--- Page 198 ---
      let theImageView = UIImageView()
      theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "book.fill")
      theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
      return theImageView
   }()
   let readingTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .right
      return label
   }()
   let readingDigitLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .right
      return label
   }()
    //MARK: - Top View UI Object - TO-BE-READ BLOCK VIEW
    lazy var toBeReadButton:UIButton = {
        let uiButton  = UIButton()
        uiButton.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        uiButton.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        uiButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        uiButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        uiButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor(red: 0/255, green: 0/255, blue:0/255, alpha: 1).cgColor
        uiButton.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        uiButton.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        uiButton.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        uiButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(tobeReadButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return uiButton

--- Page 199 ---
   }()
   let toBeReadImageView: UIImageView = {
      let theImageView = UIImageView()
      theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "books.vertical.fill")
      theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
      return theImageView
   }()
   let toBeReadTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .right
      return label
   }()
   let toBeReadDigitLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .right
      return label
   }()
We will also define two table views for displaying books by status and books marked asfavorite:
Table 10-2UI Objects
//MARK: - Table UI Object
    private let bookTableView:UITableView = {
        let tableView = UITableView()
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
        return tableView
    }()

--- Page 200 ---
    private let favBookTableView:UITableView = {
        let tableView = UITableView()
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
        return tableView
    }()
Lifecycle Method and Initial SetupWhen the UI View is called first, we need to do a few initial setup functions, as outlined in thefollowing:
We need to query the cloud repository for getting all books.Set the Background color of the view to White.Assign the Book Table Delegate and data source.Also, assign the definition of our custom cell (we will discuss this shortly) for the table cell.(Note, so far you have the Default UI Table View Cell offered by Swift)
Class-Level VariablesWe will define two class-level variables to access functions from our customDatabaseFunctions class (for all iCloud CRUD functions) and CommonFunctions(for screendrawing functions). Besides these two variables, we will also define three arrays of type Book(Defined in DatabaseFunctions class) to hold books for the three top views (Read, Reading, andTo-Be-Read). bookTitle variable stores the Title for the Book View Table and the cloudKitTaskvariable is to accept books shared from other users (we will discuss this in the latter part of thisbook). Table 10-3 has the relevant code details.
Table 10-3Class-Level Variables
let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
// We will have three table views based on the Reading status. The threefollowing variables defined will hold the books by status:
var read:[DatabaseFunctions.Book] = []
var toberead:[DatabaseFunctions.Book] = []
var reading:[DatabaseFunctions.Book] = []
var bookTitle = "Books Read"
var cloudKitTask:CKRecord?
Lifecycle MethodWe will use the Default View Will Appear method as our lifecycle method, and simply call acustom function booksQuery() to get the books from the iCloud repository. The code details arein Table 10-4.

--- Page 201 ---
Table 10-4Lifecycle View Did Appear Method
override func viewDidAppear(_ animated: Bool) {
    super.viewDidLoad()
    self.booksQuery()
}
Query BooksIn the DatabaseFunctions Class, we have a function we have written before to get all booksfrom the iCloud repository. Reference to the same is given in Table 10-5. Note that it goes againstthe user private database so, only the user-specific books are retrieved. Also note we are storingall books which have the favorite value set to 1 in the favbooks Array.
Table 10-5Book Query Function
func bookQuery() {
 let pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
 let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
 let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
 CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
 let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
 operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
 operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
   let book = Book()
   book.bookname = record["bookname"]
   book.authorname = record["authorname"]
   book.genre = record["genre"]
   book.status = record["status"]
   book.reminder = record["reminder"]
   book.favorite = record["favorite"]
   book.recordID = record.recordID
   if(book.favorite == 1){
       self.favbooks.append(book)
   }
   self.books.append(book)
 }
 operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self] (cursor, error) in
   DispatchQueue.main.async {
       if let error = error {
           print(error)
       }else {

--- Page 202 ---
           self.syncQueue.async {
               self.group.leave()
           }
       }
   }
 }
}
Back to our Books View Controller, we will define the Query Book functions. In the querybooks function, we will asynchronously wait until the iCloud finishes the query. Uponcompletion, we will create three different variables of type Book (defined inDatabaseFunctions class), and store the respective book details based on the book status(Read, Reading, or To-Be-Read). Relevant code on Book Query is in Table 10-6.
Table 10-6Book Query Function
       fileprivate func booksQuery(){
        self.databaseFunctions.books.removeAll()
        databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        databaseFunctions.bookQuery()
        databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            self.read = self.databaseFunctions.books.filter {
                book in book.status.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).lowercased()== "read"
            }
            self.toberead = self.databaseFunctions.books.filter {
                book in book.status.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).lowercased()== "to be read"
            }
            self.reading = self.databaseFunctions.books.filter {
                book in book.status.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).lowercased()== "currently reading"
            }
            self.databaseFunctions.books = self.read
            self.readButton.layer.borderWidth = 2
            self.readButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.blue.cgColor
            self.readingButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
            self.readingButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
            self.toBeReadButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
            self.toBeReadButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
            self.setup()

--- Page 203 ---
            self.topScreen()
            self.drawBookDisplay()
            self.bookTableView.reloadData()
        }
    }
1. fileprivate func booksQuery(){
2. databaseFunctions.group.enter()
3. databaseFunctions.bookQuery()
4. databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
The custom functions asynchronously; wait till the query is performed to retrieve all books5. self.read = self.databaseFunctions.books.filter {
6. book in book.status.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).lowercased() =="read"
7. }
Upon return, filter the books array in the DatabaseFunctions to get all books with status “read” and storeit in the class level variable “read” of custom class Book Type defined in the DatabaseFunctions class.Note, we are deleting any trailing whitespaces and converting the text to lowercase.8. self.toberead = self.databaseFunctions.books.filter {
9. book in book.status.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).lowercased() =="to be read"
10. }
Upon return, filter the “books” array in the DatabaseFunctions to get all books with status “to be read”and store it in the class level variable “toberead” of custom class Book Type defined in theDatabaseFunctions class. Note, we are deleting any trailing whitespaces and converting the text tolowercase.11. self.reading = self.databaseFunctions.books.filter {
12. book in book.status.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).lowercased() =="currently reading"
13. }
Upon return, filter the books array in the DatabaseFunctions to get all books with status “reading” andstore it in the class level variable “reading” of custom class Book Type defined in the DatabaseFunctionsclass. Note, we are deleting any trailing whitespaces and converting the text to lowercase.14. self.databaseFunctions.books = self.read
Since by default when the view is rendered, we want it to default to the read status array. We are storing allbooks in the “read” variable to the books array defined in the DatabaseFunctions class, which is used byour table view to display the books. Later you will see based on the top view block selection the “books”variable is updated with the related filtered books status variable (“read”, “reading”, or “toberead”)
15. self.setup()
After the queries are set we will call our custom setup functions, Explained in the next section16. self.topScreen()
We will draw the top of the screen with three block views17. self.drawBookDisplay()

--- Page 204 ---
We will draw the table for displaying the book titles18. self.bookTableView.reloadData()
Reload the table to display all books19. }
20. }
Setup FunctionWe will do two things in setup. Set the background color of the view to white and set thedelegate, data source, and cell definition for the main table to display books, and the favoritetable to display the books marked as favorite. The Cell we have used so far is the default Celldefinition of table view (UITableViewCell), while for our favorite table we will use the defaultcell, for the main book display, we will use a custom cell class. We will learn about the customcell in the Table Section. Also, note as soon as we set the delegate and the data source for thetable, we will get two errors. First, we need to make the View Controller extend the Table ViewDelegate and Table View Data Source. Second, there are two mandatory table functions that weneed to write. It is ok to have errors for now. The error will go away after completing the tablesection. Table 10-7 has the relevant code details.
Table 10-7Book Table Delegate and Data Source
    func setup(){
        view.backgroundColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 255/255, green: 255/255,blue: 255/255, alpha: 1)
        bookTableView.delegate = self
        bookTableView.dataSource = self
        bookTableView.register(BookTableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"book")
        favBookTableView.delegate = self
        favBookTableView.dataSource = self
        favBookTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"favbook")
    }
1. func setup(){
2. view.backgroundColor = .white
Setting the background color of the view to the color white.3. bookTableView.delegate = self
4. bookTableView.dataSource = self
5. bookTableView.register(BookTableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"book")
Notice the custom cell class BookTableViewCell. We will learn about how to create this in the tablesection of the tutorial. For now, it will give you error as the custom table cell is not defined yet.6. favBookTableView.delegate = self

--- Page 205 ---
7. favBookTableView.dataSource = self
8. favBookTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"favbook")
9. }
Drawing the ScreenThis code in Table 10-8 describes the details on drawing the screen layout for the main display.
Drawing the Top Screen
Table 10-8Drawing the Top Part of the Display Screen
     func topScreen(){
        let fontText = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 12, weight: .bold)
        let attributesText: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [
            .font: fontText
        ]
        let fontDigit = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 24, weight: .bold)
        let attributesDigit: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [
            .font: fontDigit
        ]
        view.addSubview(readButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 10, rightAnchor: -270, heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(readImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readImageView,constraintField: readButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor: -85,heightAnchor: 20)
        view.addSubview(readTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readTextLabel,constraintField: readButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 25, rightAnchor: -5,heightAnchor: 20)
        readTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "Books Read",attributes: attributesText)
        view.addSubview(readDigitLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readDigitLabel,constraintField: readButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 25, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
        readDigitLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:String(read.count), attributes: attributesDigit)
        view.addSubview(readingButton)

--- Page 206 ---
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingButton,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 135, rightAnchor: -140,heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(readingImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingImageView,constraintField: readingButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor:-85, heightAnchor: 20)
        view.addSubview(readingTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingTextLabel,constraintField: readingButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 30, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
        readingTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "ReadingNow", attributes: attributesText)
        view.addSubview(readingDigitLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingDigitLabel,constraintField: readingButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 25, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
        readingDigitLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:String(reading.count), attributes: attributesDigit)
        view.addSubview(toBeReadButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadButton,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 260, rightAnchor: -20,heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(toBeReadImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadImageView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 65, leftAnchor: 265, rightAnchor: -100,heightAnchor: 20)
        view.addSubview(toBeReadTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadTextLabel,constraintField: toBeReadButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 30, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
        toBeReadTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "To BeRead", attributes: attributesText)
        view.addSubview(toBeReadDigitLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadDigitLabel,constraintField: toBeReadButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 25,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: 20)
        toBeReadDigitLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:String(toberead.count), attributes: attributesDigit)
    }
1. func topScreen(){
This is the custom function to draw the top part of the screen. This will be called after the book query iscompleted

--- Page 207 ---
2. let fontText = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 12, weight: .bold)
We are defining a custom font for our top view block titles (Read/Reading/To-Be Read)3. let attributesText: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [
4. .font: fontText
5. ]
In the preceding three lines of code, we are defining a variable of Type Attributed Text. Please note UILabel,which will be used to display text, takes attributed text data type for custom font. Notice Attributed text isan array type. While we are only setting font text, other attributes can be set as well.6. let fontDigit = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 24, weight: .bold)
7. let attributesDigit: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [
8. .font: fontDigit
9. ]
The preceding four lines are for the Number of books we will display by the Book Status in the blocks. It isexactly like the code snippet before, the only difference being that digit will have a larger font size.
10. view.addSubview(readButton)
11. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 10, rightAnchor: -270, heightAnchor: 80)
12. view.addSubview(readImageView)
13. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readImageView, constraintField:readButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor: -85, heightAnchor:20)
14. view.addSubview(readTextLabel)
15. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readTextLabel, constraintField:readButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 25, rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor:20)
16. readTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "Books Read",attributes: attributesText)
17. view.addSubview(readDigitLabel)
18. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readDigitLabel,constraintField: readButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 25, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
19. readDigitLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:String(read.count), attributes: attributesDigit)
20. view.addSubview(readingButton)
21. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 135, rightAnchor: -140, heightAnchor: 80)
22. view.addSubview(readingImageView)
23. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingImageView,constraintField: readingButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor:-85, heightAnchor: 20)
24. view.addSubview(readingTextLabel)

--- Page 208 ---
25. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingTextLabel,constraintField: readingButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 30, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
26. readingTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "ReadingNow", attributes: attributesText)
27. view.addSubview(readingDigitLabel)
28. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: readingDigitLabel,constraintField: readingButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 25, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
29. readingDigitLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:String(reading.count), attributes: attributesDigit)
30. view.addSubview(toBeReadButton)
31. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadButton,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 260, rightAnchor: -20,heightAnchor: 80)
32. view.addSubview(toBeReadImageView)
33. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadImageView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 65, leftAnchor: 265, rightAnchor: -100,heightAnchor: 20)
34. view.addSubview(toBeReadTextLabel)
35. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadTextLabel,constraintField: toBeReadButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 30, rightAnchor:-5, heightAnchor: 20)
36. toBeReadTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "To BeRead", attributes: attributesText)
37. view.addSubview(toBeReadDigitLabel)
38. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: toBeReadDigitLabel,constraintField: toBeReadButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 25,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: 20)
39. toBeReadDigitLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:String(toberead.count), attributes: attributesDigit)
The preceding section code structure is explained in the first part of the book. We are drawing the topthree blocks of the screen showing the Total Book count by three statuses – Read/Reading/To-Be Read40. }
Draw Screen Main DisplayThe code in Table 10-9 will draw the Table view to display the books by status, and a section todisplay the users’ favorite books.
Table 10-9Drawing the Top Part of the Display Screen
   func drawBookDisplay(){
        view.addSubview(bookTableView)

--- Page 209 ---
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTableView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 150, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 350)
        view.addSubview(favBookTableView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: favBookTableView,constraintField: bookTableView, topAnchor: 370, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor:0, heightAnchor: 260)
    }
1. func drawBookDisplay(){
This custom function draws the body of the screen, which will display the books for the selected status andfavorite books in a table view.2. view.addSubview(bookTableView)
3. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTableView, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 150, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 350)
Drawing the Book Table View with a height of 350 pixels.4. view.addSubview(favBookTableView)
5. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: favBookTableView,constraintField: bookTableView, topAnchor: 370, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor:0, heightAnchor: 260)
Drawing the Favorite Table View with a height of 350 pixels.6. }
Table SetupCustom CellDefining a Custom CellIn designing iPhone applications, table view plays a crucial role. Aesthetically appealing screensusually have images, text with varying font designs, graphs, and blocks. And in achieving it, tableview cells play a critical role. A Cell is a view. We can design this view to have any UI Objectorganized and arranged to uplift the UI. In this example, we are creating a simple view. We willhave space between cells, and the Book name will be centrally aligned within a raised buttonwith a blue background.As explained, a cell is a class. So, go ahead and create a class of Type UITableViewCell andname it BookTableViewCell. See the screen details in Figure 10-2 for reference.

--- Page 210 ---
Figure 10-2Table View Cell Creation Option
Add a Custom ButtonOpen the class and add a custom button at the class level. This will be displayed as a row on thetable view and will be populated with the book name. The code details are in Table 10-10.
Table 10-10Custom Button Code
    let bookLabelButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.contentEdgeInsets = UIEdgeInsets(top: 5, left: 5, bottom: 0,right: 0)
        button.contentHorizontalAlignment = .center
        button.contentVerticalAlignment = .center
        button.setTitleColor(.white, for: .normal)
        button.titleLabel?.font =  UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 16)
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.titleLabel?.numberOfLines = 5
        button.titleLabel?.lineBreakMode = NSLineBreakMode.byWordWrapping
        button.backgroundColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 89/255, green: 140/255,blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1

--- Page 211 ---
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        return button
    }()
1. let bookLabelButton:UIButton = {
2. let button = UIButton()
3. button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
4. button.contentEdgeInsets = UIEdgeInsets(top: 5, left: 5, bottom: 0, right:0)
5. button.contentHorizontalAlignment = .center
6. button.contentVerticalAlignment = .center
7. button.setTitleColor(.white, for: .normal)
8. button.titleLabel?.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 16)
9. button.clipsToBounds = true
10. button.titleLabel?.numberOfLines = 5
11. button.titleLabel?.lineBreakMode = NSLineBreakMode.byWordWrapping
Title label of button can have multiple lines with a defined font and size12. button.backgroundColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 89/255, green: 140/255,blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
13. button.layer.borderWidth = 1
14. button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
15. button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
16. button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
This is to give a shadow image to the button.17. button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
18. button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
19. button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
The preceding lines of code will give the button a rounded rectangle on the edges.20. return button
21. }()
Define Class-Level Variables
    let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()

--- Page 212 ---
Draw the Cell ScreenTable 10-11 has the relevant code to draw the content within a Table Cell.
Table 10-11Table Cell Custom Layout
    override func setSelected(_ selected: Bool, animated: Bool) {
        super.setSelected(selected, animated: animated)
        contentView.backgroundColor = .white
        contentView.addSubview(bookLabelButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookLabelButton,constraintField: contentView, topAnchor: 0, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 40)
    }
1. override func setSelected(_ selected: Bool, animated: Bool) {
This is a system-defined function for cell class. This function is called every time the cell is rendered2. super.setSelected(selected, animated: animated)
3. contentView.backgroundColor = .white
we are setting up the cell with a white background4. contentView.addSubview(bookLabelButton)
Adding the label Button that we have defined before5. commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookLabelButton,constraintField: contentView, topAnchor: 0, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 40)
Drawing the button in the cell. We have learned how to draw UI Objects in the first part of this book.6. }
Table View Class InheritanceLet us now open the BooksViewController file. We need to inherit the Table Delegate and TableData source for enabling table functions for the view controller. We have learned about this indetail in Part I. Refer to the code in Table 10-12.
Table 10-12Table Inheritance
class BooksViewController: UIViewController, UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource{
Core Table FunctionsWe will implement four built-in functions of the UI Table view to set our display.Number of rows in Section – This will make the table view aware of the number of bookrecords to display. The relevant code is in Table 10-13.
Table 10-13Table Function – Number of Rows in Section
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section:Int) -> Int {

--- Page 213 ---
        if(tableView == bookTableView){
            return self.databaseFunctions.books.count
        }else{
            return self.databaseFunctions.favbooks.count
        }
    }
The total books count is returned to the table view. This will let the table view know how many cells itneeds to draw. The if condition checks for the table to draw and returns the total count of recordsaccordingly.
Cell for Row At – This function renders the cell with the book name. This function is aniterative one and, depending on the number of rows we have, the function will repeat to showthe book rows. This is also the function where we will refer to the custom cell and access the UIObjects that we have defined in the cell definition. The code is defined in Table 10-14.
Table 10-14Table Function – Cell for Row At
 func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UITableViewCell {
        if(tableView == bookTableView){
            let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "book", for: indeBookTableViewCell
            cell.bookLabelButton.setTitle(self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row]for: .normal)
            cell.bookLabelButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(taskButtonAction), .touchUpInside)
            cell.bookLabelButton.tag = indexPath.row
            return cell
        }else{
            let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "favbook", for: i
            cell.accessoryType = .disclosureIndicator
            cell.textLabel?.text = self.databaseFunctions.favbooks[indexPath.row].boo
            return cell
        }
    }
1. func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) UITableViewCell {
System defined function to draw the cells2. if(tableView == bookTableView){
if the tableview is for displaying the Book by status, the following statements will be executed
3. let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "book", for: indexPBookTableViewCell

--- Page 214 ---
The cell is defined using the table view Dequeue Reusable cell. System resources are costly and dequeue cellsrepurpose the cell that goes off-screen. So, in other words, if we have 100 books and the screen can only showthe user scrolls to display the next set of 20 books, the previously displayed cells are repurposed as they go ofnotice we are defining this as a custom cell so adding as! (forcing) to Book Table View Cell, which we have def4. cell.bookLabelButton.setTitle(self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].bofor: .normal)
the custom cell we have defined has a button with the name bookLabelButton (see the cell definition section)the UI Button setTitle to set the title of the button as the current row book name. (All books stored in books vdatabaseFunctions class and the indexpath.row provide the current book index.)5. cell.bookLabelButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(taskButtonAction), fo.touchUpInside)
Notice the function taskButtonAction added to the button for .touchupinside event. This function will be invthe button is pressed on each cell to show the details of the book. For now, we will get an error as the functiondefined.6. cell.bookLabelButton.tag = indexPath.row
When the button on a cell is called, we need to know which book needs to be displayed. Tag is an integer variaare using this to store the current row number to later retrieve the necessary book details7. return cell
returning the cell for display8. }else{
if the tableview is not for displaying the Book by status, the following statements will be executed for showingmarked as favorites
9. let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "favbook", for: ind
Notice we are using the default cell type here10. cell.accessoryType = .disclosureIndicator
setting the cell accessorytype to discoloure indicator shows a > symbol at the end of the record11. cell.textLabel?.text = self.databaseFunctions.favbooks[indexPath.row].bookn
setting the display label with the favorite book name12. return cell
returning the cell for display13. }
14. }
Title for Header in Section – This will show the header of the table. We will return a labelbased on which block is selected from the top part of the screen (Books Read, Reading Now, andTo Be Read. The relevant code is defined in Table 10-15.
Table 10-15Table Function – Table Header Display
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, titleForHeaderInSection section:Int) -> String? {
        if(tableView == bookTableView){
            return bookTitle
        }else{

--- Page 215 ---
            return "Favorite Books"
        }
    }
This is the class level variable which will hold the table header title. For Book display by status, it willdisplay the value of the bookTitle class variable. For Favorite books, it will display “Favorite Books.”
Height for Row At: Since in our custom cell the height of the button is 40 and we need toleave space between two cells, we want to make row height more than the default 40 pixels. Forthe Favorite book it is set to the standard 40 Pixel. The relevant code is defined in Table 10-16.
Table 10-16Table Function – Table Row Height
 func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> CGFloat {
        if(tableView == bookTableView){
            return 50.0
        }
        else{
            return 40.0
        }
    }
When the Favorite book cell is clicked, we need to show the details of the book, as shown inTable 10-17.
Table 10-17Table Function – Table Did Select Row
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) {
        if(tableView == favBookTableView){
            let viewController = BookViewController()
            viewController.delegateBooksViewRefresh = self
            viewController.book = databaseFunctions.favbooks[indexPath.row]
            viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
            viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
            self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion: nil)
            favBookTableView.deselectRow(at: indexPath, animated: true)
        }
    }
1. func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) {
Table View built-in function did Select Row At is called when the cell in a table is selected2. if(tableView == favBookTableView){

--- Page 216 ---
We will invoke this if the table is Favorite Table view. (Recall for Book Table view by status, we have acustom cell so this function will not be called)
3. let viewController = BookViewController()
We are getting the handle of the BookViewController (We will discuss about this in the latter part of thechapter to display detail of the selected book)4. viewController.delegateBooksViewRefresh = self
Delegates can be used to pass values and invoke functions across view controllers. We will use thisdelegate to update any changes done on the book detail view controller back to our main display. In thiscase, the BookViewController has a delegate variable with the name delegateBooksViewRefresh whichconfirms to a custom protocol (RefreshBooksViewProtocol defined at the program level inCommonFunctions class) and we are confirming it to the current class. We will dedicate a section talkingabout delegates in the latter part of this book.5. viewController.book = databaseFunctions.favbooks[indexPath.row]
the book that user selects is stored in the book variable of type Book in the BookViewController class6. viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
As we are going to display the Book detail view controller, this defines how the screen needs to bepresented7. viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
As we are going to display the Book detail view controller, this defines how the screen animation will bedone8. self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion: nil)
this will present the BookViewController9. favBookTableView.deselectRow(at: indexPath, animated: true)
after the user comes back to the current view controller, we are deselecting the row, otherwise it willremain highlighted from the last selection.10. }
11. }
Calling the Book Detail Screen When the Custom Cell Button Is Clicked
    @objc func taskButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        let viewController = BookViewController()
        viewController.delegateBooksViewRefresh = self
        viewController.book = databaseFunctions.books[sender.tag]
        viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
        viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
        self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion: nil)
    }
The preceding code is the same when the favorite Book cell is clicked as explained previously. The onlydifference is that it is called on the button .touchupinside event.
Top View Blocks

--- Page 217 ---
Now that the table is defined, we will work on the top view. As we click on the top three viewblocks, the display table will change and the view block will be highlighted with a blue colorborder shade, as shown in Figure 10-3.:

--- Page 219 ---
Figure 10-3Book Display Screen – Top View – Book Status
View Button ActionThis section, we will focus on clicking on the top views to change the table to display therespective book records. Each of the top views is enclosed in an UI Button. While defining thebutton (see section Defining UI Objects for the Top Views), we have defined a button functionon the event touchupinside for each of the three views. We will implement those functionshere.Reading Button Action: This function is called when the user clicks on the second view toshow books that user is currently reading. Recall when we queried the table, we filtered on thebook records for status “reading” and stored it in a variable “reading” of type Book classdefined in DatabaseFunctions class. The relevant code details are in Table 10-18.
Table 10-18Top View Function – Currently Reading
@objc func readingButtonAction(action: UIButton){
        self.databaseFunctions.books = reading
        self.bookTitle = "Books Currently Reading"
        bookTableView.reloadData()
        readButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        readButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        readingButton.layer.borderWidth = 2
        readingButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.blue.cgColor
        toBeReadButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        toBeReadButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
    }
1. @objc func readingButtonAction(action: UIButton){
2. self.databaseFunctions.books = reading
Setting the books variable to the values of only the “reading” variable. The books variable is used by thetable view to display records. By making it set to only reading, we ensure the table view can only show thebooks which the user is currently reading.3. self.bookTitle = "Books Currently Reading"
the Table View Header is changed to a new title4. bookTableView.reloadData()
We need to reload the table to show the new set of records5. readButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
  6. readButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
for appearance, we want to make the first view (Read) border width 1 and border color black

--- Page 220 ---
  7. readingButton.layer.borderWidth = 2
  8. readingButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.blue.cgColor
our current view border should be a little thicker (2), and for a different color, we have chosen blue.  9. toBeReadButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
10. toBeReadButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
for appearance, we want to make the third view (To Be Read) border width 1 and border color black11. }
Read Button Action: This function is called when the user clicks on the First view to showbooks that user is currently reading. Recall when we queried the table, we filtered on the bookrecords for status “read” and stored it in a variable “reading” of type Book class defined inDatabaseFunctions class. The relevant code details are in Table 10-19.
Table 10-19Top View Function – Read
@objc func readButtonAction(action: UIButton){
        self.databaseFunctions.books = read
        self.bookTitle = "Books Read"
        bookTableView.reloadData()
        readButton.layer.borderWidth = 2
        readButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.blue.cgColor
        readingButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        readingButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        toBeReadButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        toBeReadButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
    }
To Be Button Action: This function is called when the user clicks on the third view to showbooks that user is currently reading. Recall when we queried the table, we filtered on the bookrecords for status “to be read” and stored it in a variable “reading” of type Book class defined inDatabaseFunctions class. The relevant code details are in Table 10-20.
Table 10-20Top View Function – To Be Read
@objc func tobeReadButtonAction(action: UIButton){
        self.databaseFunctions.books = toberead
        self.bookTitle = "Books To Read"
        bookTableView.reloadData()
        readButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        readButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        readingButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        readingButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor

--- Page 221 ---
        toBeReadButton.layer.borderWidth = 2
        toBeReadButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.blue.cgColor
    }
Custom DelegationDelegations allow objects to communicate back to the source of its origin in a decoupled way.Swift inherently uses Delegation for all its objects – example is the return button on the Textfield keyboard. When we implement the default Text field delegate in a view controller,whenever the return key is pressed, a system-defined delegate function is called, and if it isimplemented, the code is executed accordingly.In this section, we are going to learn how to create a custom delegate. Before we go ahead, letus understand the use case. In our App, from the Main Display screen, user can tap on a bookand can launch the Book Detail screen where following book specific actions can be taken.
User can delete the book.Mark the book as favorite.Edit the Book.When user changes any of the preceding data, the Main Display screen needs to be updated asfollows.If the book is deleted, the Main Display should not display the book any more.When a book is marked as favorite, it should appear in the Favorite section of the MainDisplay Screen.If the status of book is changed between Read/Currently Reading/To Be Read, the viewshould change accordingly.Let us now go ahead and implement it.
Define the Delegate ProtocolDelegate is defined at a project level. We can choose any Class and put it above the classdefinition. For increasing the readability, we are going to put it in the CommonFunctions class.Table 10-21 has the relevant code details.
Table 10-21Delegate Protocol Definition
protocol RefreshBooksViewProtocol {
    func refreshData()
    func refreshData(book: DatabaseFunctions.Book)
}
1. protocol RefreshBooksViewProtocol {
To define a protocol, we need to use the system-defined term protocol followed by a custom function name2. func refreshData()
3. func refreshData(book: DatabaseFunctions.Book)
The protocol will need a minimum of one function. We have defined two custom functions that will beimplemented in the Main Display when the control is returned to refresh the view.4. }

--- Page 222 ---
Implementing the DelegateThe next step is to implement the delegate in the owner class where the delegate function willbe executed once called from the child class. In our example, the owner class is the Main Displayclass. We need to do three things:
Class definition is provided in Table 10-22, which includes the delegate’s name.
Table 10-22Class Extending the Delegate Protocol
class BooksViewController: UIViewController, UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource, RefreshBooksViewProtocol {
RefreshBooksViewProtocol is the protocol name that we need to implement
Implement the delegate function(s) as defined in Table 10-23.
Table 10-23Delegate Protocol Implementation
//MARK: - Protocol Implementation
    //This section is the implementation of the Protocol functions of ourcustom-defined protocol RefreshBooksViewProtocol
    //RefreshData refreshes the view by querying the repository for allnew/modified records.
    func refreshData() {
        booksQuery()
    }
    // This is a shell implementation to confirm to the protocol requirement
    func refreshData(book: DatabaseFunctions.Book) {
    }
As our protocol has two functions, notice that we need to implement both the functions even though, inthis class, we need only the first function. The implementation is simple; when the function is called, itwill in turn be called the booksQuery( ) function. We have discussed this function before, it queries theiCloud database for all books and refreshes the view. So, if there are changes made, it will display thosechanges accordingly.
Set the delegate reference on the calling object/class, as defined in Table 10-24.
Table 10-24Delegate Protocol Reference Setup
      @objc func taskButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        let viewController = BookViewController()
        viewController.delegateBooksViewRefresh = self
        viewController.book = databaseFunctions.books[sender.tag]
        viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
        viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
        self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion: nil)
    }

--- Page 223 ---
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) {
        if(tableView == favBookTableView){
            let viewController = BookViewController()
            viewController.delegateBooksViewRefresh = self
            viewController.book = databaseFunctions.favbooks[indexPath.row]
            viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
            viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
            self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion: nil)
            favBookTableView.deselectRow(at: indexPath, animated: true)
        }
    }
We have discussed these two functions in the Main Display View controller before. The first function iscalled when the user taps on the Book name in the main display and the second function is called whenthe user taps a book in the favorite table.In both the functions, the variable delegateBooksViewRefresh, which is of the custom typeRefreshBooksViewProtocol, is set to self, indicating the handle to the delegate. This is important to getaccess to the delegate functions.
Calling the DelegateThe last step in the delegate is to call the delegate function. In our example, we want to call thedelegate function when the user is exiting the Book Detail Screen. Following are the two stepswe need to do in the Book Detail View Controller (BookViewController) class file.
Define a Delegate Protocol VariableTable 10-25 has the delegate protocol variable to handle delegate request.
Table 10-25Delegate Protocol Reference Variable
    var delegateBooksViewRefresh:RefreshBooksViewProtocol? = nil
This variable is required to get the handle to the delegate where the delegate protocol is defined. Pleasenote this is a class-level variable
Calling the Delegate Protocol FunctionTable 10-26 has the delegate protocol call handling details.
Table 10-26Delegate Protocol Call
     func deleteBook(){
        let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Delete Book Action'',message: "Are you sure you want to delete \(self.book.bookname ?? "")?",preferredStyle: .alert)
        let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {

--- Page 224 ---
                UIAlertAction in
            self.databaseFunctions.deleteBook(bookname: self.book.bookname,authorname: self.book.authorname)
            self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
            self.commonFunctions.startSpinner(view: self.view!, color: 1, spinner:self.spinner)
            self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
                self.commonFunctions.stopSpinner(spinner: self.spinner)
                self.delegateBooksViewRefresh?.refreshData()
                self.dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
            }
        }
        let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style:UIAlertAction.Style.cancel) {
                UIAlertAction in
        }
        // Add the actions
        alertController.addAction(okAction)
        alertController.addAction(cancelAction)
        // Present the controller
        self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
    }
This function is called when the user selects to delete the book (We will learn about it in the Book viewsection). After the book is deleted, the Book View Controller is dismissed so that it can return to the parentview. Right before that, the delegate protocol function is calledself.delegateBooksViewRefresh?.refreshData()
As discussed in the previous section, this will in turn call the Book Query function, retrieving the booksfrom iCloud and refreshing the view to display it.
SummaryIn this chapter, we redesigned our Display Books View Controller. Customizing Table View Cellto display other UI Objects was a critical part of learning in this chapter. We also learned aboutTap Gestures to add our own events on UI Objects which don’t have built-in events. Finally, welearned about delegates – as we move between screens, we need to pass values across views –delegates help us to achieve the same.In the next chapter, we will learn about revamping the Add Book screen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 225 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_11
11. Adding a Book
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
This chapter will provide details on how to add a book to our library. We will create a new viewcontroller for adding a book and link it to the bottom tab bar, as shown in Figure 11-1.
Figure 11-1Add Book Tab Bar Option
The Add Book will take the following information from the user:
Book Name as an Input field – while saving, it will check for duplicate namesAuthor Name – Name of the Author as free textGenre – This is a drop-down table providing a list of Genre for the user to select

--- Page 226 ---
Status – This is a drop-down table with three options Read/Reading/To Be Read. This status isused to display book by category
All inputs are mandatory. Save won’t work if any of the values is missing. The screen layoutfor Adding a book is shown in Figure 11-2. Execute the following steps to complete thefunctions.
Figure 11-2Add Book Screen
Creation of View Controller and Linking It to the Tab BarCreate a new view controller with the name AddBookViewController and, in the Mainstoryboard, link it to the Add Book Tab bar button. (See Part I to learn how to link class to a tab.)
Inheriting DelegatesThis view controller will inherit the table Delegate, table data source, and Text Field Delegates.The Table delegate and data source is to display a table for Genre and Status, and the Text Fielddelegate is to make the keyboard disappear when return is pressed. Class inheritance code is inTable 11-1.
Table 11-1Class Inheritance
class AddBookViewController: UIViewController, UITableViewDelegate,

--- Page 227 ---
UITableViewDataSource, UITextFieldDelegate {
Declaring VariablesWe will declare the following class variables as outlined in Table 11-2.
DatabaseFunctions variable – to access all iCloud functions and variables defined in ourcustom classCommonFunctions variable – to access screen drawing function when iCloud asynchronousfunction is performedCommonVariables variable - to access all common variables such as Genre and StatusA variable of Book Type to hold the newly created book details
Table 11-2Class Declarations
//MARK: - Class Variables
    // the following three variables are used to access the common classfunctions and variables
    let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
    let commonVariables = CommonVariables()
    let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
Declaring Screen ObjectsThis section is for the UI Object definition for the Add Book Screen. The following UI Objects willbe added to the screen:
A Navigation bar with two buttons, Save and Reset, as shown in Table 11-3.
Table 11-3Add Book UI Objects
private let addNavigationBar:UINavigationBar = {
        let navigationBar = UINavigationBar()
        navigationBar.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        navigationBar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 171/255, green:189/255, blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
        let navItem = UINavigationItem(title: "Add a Book")
        let resetSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize:15, weight: .black)
        let resetImage = UIImage(systemName: "arrowshape.turn.up.left.fill",withConfiguration: resetSymbolConfiguration)
        let editItem  = UIBarButtonItem(image: resetImage, landscapeImagePhone:resetImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action:#selector(resetButtonAction))
        let saveSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize:20, weight: .black)
        let saveImage = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill", withConfiguration:saveSymbolConfiguration)

--- Page 228 ---
        let saveItem  = UIBarButtonItem(image: saveImage, landscapeImagePhone:saveImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action: #selector(saveButtonAction))
        navItem.rightBarButtonItem = saveItem
        navItem.leftBarButtonItem = editItem
        navigationBar.setItems([navItem], animated: false)
        let image = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill")
        let imageView = UIImageView(image: image)
        var imageViewFrame = imageView.frame
        imageViewFrame.size.width = 200
        imageViewFrame.size.height = 200
        imageViewFrame.origin.x = 0
        imageViewFrame.origin.y = 0
        imageView.frame = imageViewFrame
        return navigationBar
    }()
Two Input Text Field for Book and Author Name Input, as shown in Table 11-4.
Table 11-4Add Book UI Objects
private lazy var bookTextField:UITextField = {
        let textField = UITextField()
        textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
        textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
        textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "EnterBook Name", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])
        textField.textColor = .white
        textField.addTarget(self, action: #selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin),for: .editingDidBegin)
       return textField
    }()
    private lazy var authorTextField:UITextField = {
        let textField = UITextField()
        textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
        textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
        textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "EnterAuthor Name", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])

--- Page 229 ---
        textField.textColor = .white
        textField.addTarget(self, action: #selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin),for: .editingDidBegin)
        return textField
    }()
Two Display only Text Field to show the selected Genre and Status, as shown in Table 11-5.
Table 11-5Add Book UI Objects
private lazy var genreTextField:UITextField = {
        let textField = UITextField()
        textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
        textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
        textField.isEnabled = false
        textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "Select aGenre", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])
        textField.textColor = .white
        textField.addTarget(self, action: #selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin),for: .editingDidBegin)
        return textField
    }()
    private lazy var statusTextField:UITextField = {
        let textField = UITextField()
        textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        textField.backgroundColor = .darkGray
        textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
        textField.isEnabled = false
        textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: "Select aStatus", attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:UIColor.white])
        textField.textColor = .white
        textField.addTarget(self, action: #selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin),for: .editingDidBegin)
        return textField
    }()
Two Table Views to display available Genre and Status, as shown in Table 11-6.
Table 11-6Add Book UI Objects
private let genreTableView:UITableView = {

--- Page 230 ---
        let tableView = UITableView()
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
        return tableView
    }()
    private let statusTableView:UITableView = {
        let tableView = UITableView()
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
        return tableView
    }()
We have explained in Part I of this book how objects are defined. Please visit Part I if youneed to learn more about defining custom objects.
Screen Load Event and Initial FunctionsWe will use the default View Load function to initialize our screen. There are two function wewill call:
Setup – this is for the initial setup. We will achieve the following in the setup functions:
Initialize the table views – set the delegate, Set the Cell Reusable Identifier, and StyleGet the Genre and StatusText Field delegate setup
Draw the Screen with all variables
View Did LoadView Did Load function code details are in Table 11-7.
Table 11-7View Did Load Function
/*
     Leveraging the default viewDidLoad method to initiate a custom functionsetup to perform initial setup and a drawInputScreen function to draw thebook Add screen
     */
    override func viewDidLoad() {
        super.viewDidLoad()
        setup()
        drawInputScreen()
    }

--- Page 231 ---
Custom function setup and drawInputScreen are called from the View Did Load function
Setup FunctionView Did Load function code details are in Table 11-8.
Table 11-8Setup Function
/*
     The setup function will do the following:
     - Setup the Genre and Ststus Table - both uses the Default Cell Type
     - Call the setGenres function to set all the Genres to be displayed foruser selection
     - Call the setStatuses function to set all the Statuses to be displayedfor user selection
     - Set the delegates for the Book and Author Text Fields
     */
    func setup(){
        genreTableView.delegate = self
        genreTableView.dataSource = self
        genreTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"genre")
        genreTableView.layer.borderWidth = 0
        genreTableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.white.cgColor
        genreTableView.separatorStyle = .none
        statusTableView.delegate = self
        statusTableView.dataSource = self
        statusTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"status")
        statusTableView.layer.borderWidth = 0
        statusTableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.white.cgColor
        statusTableView.separatorStyle = .none
        commonVariables.setGenres()
        commonVariables.setStatuses()
        bookTextField.delegate = self
        authorTextField.delegate = self
    }
The Table setup we have gone through before, so we are going to skip the explanation. We are also usingthe default Cell Type for the table cell.There are two functions defined in the CommonVariables Calls, which will populate the Genre and StatusArray object. The following section will explain the functions

--- Page 232 ---
Genre and Status ObjectsWe will put the Genre and Status Objects in the CommonVariables class. The code in Table 11-9provides the steps in defining the Genre and Status object and populating the respectivevariables.
Create a Class called CommonVariables of type NSObject.Define the following class level objects and variables.
Table 11-9Class and Static Variable Definition
/*
     Two Static Variable defined for the type of query to be performed.
    */
    static let Query_ALL = "All Shared"
    static let Query_LIST = "List"
    /*
    Genre Class for defining Genre for the books
    */
    class Genre{
        var genrename:String!
        var genredetail:[GenreDetail]!
    }
    class GenreDetail{
        var genresubname:String!
    }
    /*
    The Status class is about the Book Reading Statuses
    */
    class Status{
        var status:String!
    }
    /*
     Array variables defined for storing genre and status
     */
    var genres:[Genre] = []
    var statuses:[Status] = []
    1. static let Query_ALL = "All Shared"
    2. static let Query_LIST = "List"
Two static variables are defined, which will be referred to during querying of the database to let thefunction know what object type we need to query.    3. class Genre{

--- Page 233 ---
    4. var genrename:String!
    5. var genredetail:[GenreDetail]!
    6. }
    7. class GenreDetail{
    8. var genresubname:String!
    9. }
Defining a class named “Genre.” One parent “Genre” can have multiple child “Genre” objects. So, the“Genre” class has a Genre Name variable for the parent’s name and a Genre Detail array of objects tostore the child genre name. The Genre Detail has a string genre name to store the child Genre.    10. class Status{
    11. var status:String!
    12. }
Defining a Status class to store the Book Status (Read/Reading/To Be Read)    13. var genres:[Genre] = []
Defining a “genres” array object of type Genre Class. This will store all genre names to be used topopulate the Genre Table    14. var statuses:[Status] = []
Defining a “statuses” array object of type Status Class. This will store all Statuses to be used to populatethe Status Table
Set Genre Function, as shown in Table 11-10, for setting up the Genre class object.
Table 11-10Genre Setup Function
/*
     setGenres sets the genres array with all identified genre
    */
    func setGenres(){
        var g = Genre()
        g.genrename = "Fiction"
        var gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Fantasy"
        g.genredetail = [GenreDetail]()
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Dystopian"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Action & Adventure"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()

--- Page 234 ---
        gd.genresubname = "Mystery"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Horror"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Thriller & Suspense"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Historical Fiction"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Romance"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Women’s Fiction"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "LGBTQ+"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Contemporary Fiction"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Literary Fiction"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Magical Realism"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Science Fiction"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Graphic Novel"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Short Story"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)

--- Page 235 ---
        gd.genresubname = "Young Adult"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "New Adult"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Children’s"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        genres.append(g)
        g = Genre()
        g.genrename = "Non Fiction"
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Memoir & Autobiography"
        g.genredetail = [GenreDetail]()
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Biography"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Food & Drink"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Art & Photography"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Self-help"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "History"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Travel"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "True Crime"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()

--- Page 236 ---
        gd.genresubname = "Humor"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Essays"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Guide or How-to"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Religion & Spirituality"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Humanities & Social Sciences"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Parenting & Families"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Science & Technology"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        gd = GenreDetail()
        gd.genresubname = "Children’s"
        g.genredetail.append(gd)
        genres.append(g)
    }
This function stores the genre names against two main categories: Fiction and Nonfiction.
Set Status Function, as shown in Table 11-11, for setting up the status class object.
Table 11-11Status Setup Function
/*
     setStatuses sets the statuses array with all identified statuses
    */
    func setStatuses(){
        var s = Status()
        s.status = "Read"
        statuses.append(s)
        s = Status()
        s.status = "Currently Reading"

--- Page 237 ---
        statuses.append(s)
        s = Status()
        s.status = "To Be Read"
        statuses.append(s)
    }
This function stores all three types of book status in the “Statuses” variable.
Draw ScreenNow, let us come back to our AddBookViewController class and add the function as shown inTable 11-12.
Table 11-12Draw Add Book Screen
/*
     The drawInputScreen will draw the Add Book Screen with all text fieldsand table views.
    */
    func drawInputScreen(){
        view.addSubview(addNavigationBar)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: addNavigationBar,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 40)
        view.addSubview(bookTextField)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTextField,constraintField: addNavigationBar, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: 40)
        view.addSubview(authorTextField)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: authorTextField,constraintField: bookTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor:0, heightAnchor: 40)
        view.addSubview(genreTextField)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: genreTextField,constraintField: authorTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 0,rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 40)
        view.addSubview(genreTableView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: genreTableView,constraintField: genreTextField, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor:0, heightAnchor: 200)
        view.addSubview(statusTextField)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: statusTextField,constraintField: genreTableView, topAnchor: 220, leftAnchor: 0,rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 40)

--- Page 238 ---
        view.addSubview(statusTableView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: statusTableView,constraintField: statusTextField, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 0,rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 200)
    }
This function is called next after the setup function, which will draw the objects on the screen as shown inthe following.
Figure 11-3Add Book screen
Displaying the Genre and Status TableThe following code will display the Genre and Status table view. The following Table Functionsare required to create the table view.
Table SectionsThis code in Table 11-13 is required for the Genre Table. We have two sections of Genre: Fictionand Non-Fiction. The following code instructs the Genre Table View that there exist two displaysections.
Table 11-13Table Function – Number of Sections

--- Page 239 ---
/*
     We have two tables but only the Genre will have section - Fiction and NonFiction. Note that we are returning 1 if it is not the genre Table
     */
    func numberOfSections(in tableView: UITableView) -> Int {
        if(tableView == genreTableView){
            return commonVariables.genres.count
        }else{
            return 1
        }
    }
Table RowsBoth tables need to inform the Table View how many rows are there for Genre (in each section)and status table. The relevant code is in Table 11-14.
Table 11-14Table Function – Number of Rows in Section
/*
     Number of rows for each section of the respective table view is returnedusing this function
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section:Int) -> Int {
        if(tableView == genreTableView){
            return commonVariables.genres[section].genredetail.count
        }else{
            return commonVariables.statuses.count
        }
    }
Table Display Cell ValueThis f code in Table 11-15 will display the respective genre and status on the table view.
Table 11-15Table Function – Cell for Row At
/*
     cellForRowAt will display the values for the respective genre or status tab
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) UITableViewCell {
        if(tableView == genreTableView){

--- Page 240 ---
            let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "genre", for:indexPath)
            cell.textLabel?.text =commonVariables.genres[indexPath.section].genredetail[indexPath.row].genresub
            return cell
        }else{
            let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "status", for:indexPath)
            cell.textLabel?.text = commonVariables.statuses[indexPath.row].status
            return cell
        }
    }
Table Row HeightThe Height of each row of the table is defined in Table 11-16.
Table 11-16Table Function – Row Height
/*
     The Height of the Cell Row is set to default 40 pixels
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> CGFloat {
        return 40.0
    }
Table HeaderWe are going to design the Header of each table (Section Header) – this code provides detail onthe same. Notice that everything in a table is a view. We are adding label objects to the headerview and enhancing the font and size for the header. Relevant code is in Table 11-17.
Table 11-17Table Function – View for Header Section
/*
     The header for both the tables are set here. Note, the Genre has twosection - Fiction and Non Fiction
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, viewForHeaderInSection section:Int) -> UIView? {
        if(tableView == genreTableView){
            let headerView = UIView.init(frame: CGRect.init(x: 0, y: 0, width:tableView.frame.width, height: 50))
            headerView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 245/255, green: 245/255,

--- Page 241 ---
blue: 245/255, alpha: 1)
            let label = UILabel()
            label.frame = CGRect.init(x: 15, y: 0, width: headerView.frame.width-10, height: headerView.frame.height-10)
            label.text = commonVariables.genres[section].genrename
            label.textColor = .black
            label.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 18)
            headerView.addSubview(label)
            return headerView
        }else{
            let headerView = UIView.init(frame: CGRect.init(x: 0, y: 0, width:tableView.frame.width, height: 50))
            headerView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 245/255, green: 245/255,blue: 245/255, alpha: 1)
            let label = UILabel()
            label.frame = CGRect.init(x: 15, y: 0, width: headerView.frame.width-10, height: headerView.frame.height-10)
            label.text = "Status"
            label.textColor = .black
            label.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 18)
            headerView.addSubview(label)
            return headerView
        }
    }
Table Header HeightThe height of the header section is defined in Table 11-18.
Table 11-18Table function -height for Header Section
/*
     The height of the Header section is set to default 40 Pixels.
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForHeaderInSection section:Int) -> CGFloat {
        return 40.0
    }
Table Select Row ActionWhen the user selects a genre or a status, we need to update the genre read-only text field withthe value. This event-based code defined in Table 11-19 is used for achieving that function.

--- Page 242 ---
Table 11-19Table Function – Did Select Row At
/*
     When the user selects the value in the table views(genre and status), the sis stored in the respective text field.
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAt indexPath: IndexPath
        if(tableView == genreTableView){
            genreTextField.text = commonVariables.genres[indexPath.section].genrename"::" +commonVariables.genres[indexPath.section].genredetail[indexPath.row].genresub
        }else{
            statusTextField.text =  commonVariables.statuses[indexPath.row].status
        }
    }
Input Text Field EventsThe Text fields events are explained in this section. There are two events which are important.
Visual DisplayCode for Editing Did begin is defined in Table 11-20.
Table 11-20Text Field – Did Editing Begin
/*
     When Editing begins we aere making the border width to zero. This is doneto remove the red border, incase It was empty in the previous save attempt
     */
     @objc func textFieldEditingDidBegin(sender: UITextField){
        sender.layer.borderWidth = 0
    }
Editing Did Begin is an event which is triggered when the user starts inputting into the text field (BookName and Author Name) – the border will be colored red when the input is blank or incorrect (existingbook name) while saving the book. When user starts entering the book name again, we are making the redcolor to go away by making the border width to 0
Disappear the Keyboard Upon ReturnCode for Text Field should Return is defined in Table 11-21.
Table 11-21Text Field – Keyboard Should Return
/*
     When the Return key is pressed on a keyboard it dismisses the keyobardusing the following event

--- Page 243 ---
     */
    func textFieldShouldReturn(_ textField: UITextField) -> Bool{
        textField.resignFirstResponder()
        return false
    }
Save the BookIn this code defined in Table 11-22, we will learn to save the book to the iCloud repository.Before saving, the function checks if the fields are empty, and if any of the inputs are missing itmarks the text field with a red border and puts the placeholder text with appropriate warningmessage. The function also checks for duplicate book names and provides warnings accordingly.If the book data is entered properly, it is saved to the iCloud repository.
Table 11-22Save Book Function – Validation
/*
     This function is called when the user presses the save button on thenavigation bar. It checks if the input fields are empty or not. If empty,it sets a variable canSave to false. Make the border red and put respectiveplaceholder text in the input text field stating the respective fieldcannot be blank. If all fields have value, it stores the text field valuesto the class level defined book variable,and call the saveBook function
     */
    @objc func saveButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        var canSave:Bool = true
        if(bookTextField.text == ""){
            bookTextField.placeholder = "Book Name cannot be blank"
            bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
            bookTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
            bookTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
            canSave = false
        }else{
            bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
        }
        if(authorTextField.text == ""){
            authorTextField.placeholder = "Author Name cannot be blank"
            authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
            authorTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
            authorTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
            canSave = false
        }else{

--- Page 244 ---
            authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
        }
        if(genreTextField.text == ""){
            genreTextField.placeholder = "Genre cannot be blank"
            genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
            genreTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
            genreTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
            canSave = false
        }else{
            genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
        }
        if(statusTextField.text == ""){
            statusTextField.placeholder = "Status cannot be blank"
            statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
            statusTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
            statusTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
            canSave = false
        }else{
            statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
        }
        if(canSave){
            book.bookname = bookTextField.text!
            book.authorname = authorTextField.text!
            book.genre = genreTextField.text!
            book.status = statusTextField.text!
            book.favorite = 0
            saveBook()
        }
    }
    1. @objc func saveButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
This function is linked to the save button of the Navigation Bar    2. var canSave:Bool = true
This variable will be set to false if the text fields are blank or the entered book name is not accurate.    3. if(bookTextField.text == ""){
    4. bookTextField.placeholder = "Book Name cannot be blank"
    5. bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
    6. bookTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
    7. bookTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor

--- Page 245 ---
    8. canSave = false
    9. }else{
    10. bookTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
    11. }
If the book name is blank – canSave variable is set to false, book saving is aborted, and the book name textfield border color is set to red and placeholder text states “Book Name can’t be blank”    12. if(authorTextField.text == ""){
    13. authorTextField.placeholder = "Author Name cannot be blank"
    14. authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
    15. authorTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
    16. authorTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
    17. canSave = false
    18. }else{
    19. authorTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
    20. }
If the author’s name is blank – canSave variable is set to false, book saving is aborted, and the author’sname text field border color is set to red and placeholder text states “Author Name can’t be blank”    21. if(genreTextField.text == ""){
    22. genreTextField.placeholder = "Genre cannot be blank"
    23. genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
    24. genreTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
    25. genreTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
    26. canSave = false
    27. }else{
    28. genreTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
    29. }
If the Genre is blank – canSave variable is set to false, book saving is aborted, and the Genre name text fieldborder color is set to red and placeholder text states “Genre can’t be blank”
    30. if(statusTextField.text == ""){
    31. statusTextField.placeholder = "Status cannot be blank"
    32. statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 2
    33. statusTextField.layer.cornerRadius = 5
    34. statusTextField.layer.borderColor = UIColor.red.cgColor
    35. canSave = false
    36. }else{
    37. statusTextField.layer.borderWidth = 0
    38. }
If the Status is blank – canSave variable is set to false, book saving is aborted, and the Status text fieldborder color is set to red and placeholder text states “Status can’t be blank”

--- Page 246 ---
    39. if(canSave){
    40. book.bookname = bookTextField.text!
    41. book.authorname = authorTextField.text!
    42. book.genre = genreTextField.text!
    43. book.status = statusTextField.text!
    44. book.favorite = 0
    45. saveBook()
    46. }
If CanSave Variable is true – we populate the book class level variable with the user entered/selected valueand call the custom save book function    47. }
Saving to iCloudThe code defined in Table 11-23 will call the iCloud asynchronous function to save the bookrecord in the iCloud private repository of the user and wait for completion.
Table 11-23Save Book – iCloud Function Query
/*
    This function saves the book to the repository and post saving to providesan alert that the book is saved.
    */
    fileprivate func saveBook(){
        databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        databaseFunctions.saveBook(book:book)
        databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Save Alert", message:"Book '\(self.book.bookname!)' is Saved", preferredStyle: .alert)
            // Create the actions
            let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
                    UIAlertAction in
                self.tabBarController?.selectedIndex = 0
            }
            // Add the actions
            alertController.addAction(okAction)
            self.resetField()
            // Present the controller
            self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
        }

--- Page 247 ---
    }
    1. fileprivate func saveBook(){
Custom function to save the book    2. databaseFunctions.group.enter()
Waiting on the asynchronous loop    3. databaseFunctions.saveBook(book:book)
calling the save book function that will persist data in the iCloud – please see the next section for details onsaving the book    4. databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
After the book is saved to iCloud repository, it will notify the main thread, and we will execute thefollowing statements post saving.    5. let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Save Alert", message:"Book '\(self.book.bookname!)' is Saved", preferredStyle: .alert)
Declare an Alert Control, prompting user that saving is done.    6. // Create the actions
    7. let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
    8. UIAlertAction in
    9. self.tabBarController?.selectedIndex = 0
    10. }
The alert has only one button, “OK”, which, when pressed, we will go to the first tab to display the books
    11. // Add the actions
    12. alertController.addAction(okAction)
The Ok Action is added to the alert controller    13. self.resetField()
We will also call the reset field to empty all fields    14. // Present the controller
    15. self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
This presents the alert to the user.    16. }
    17. }
Saving Book Record to iCloudWe will create a Class file DataBaseFunctions of type NSObject which will have all functionsrequired to save, update, query, delete Book Records.
Define Class ObjectsWe will define a class name Book, which will mimic our Book table in iCloud. We will also definethree variables of class Book to hold all books, favorite books, and a single book instance. Theclass definition is in Table 11-24.

--- Page 248 ---
Table 11-24Book Class definition
/*
    The Class Book mimics the Book table we have created in our iCloudRepository.
    */
    class Book{
        var bookname:String!
        var authorname:String!
        var genre:String!
        var status:String!
        var favorite:Int64!
        var reminder:Date!
        var recordID: CKRecord.ID!
    }
    /*
     books and favbooks are array variable of type Book. book is a variable oftype Book
     */
    var books = [Book]()
    var favbooks = [Book]()
    var book = Book()
Define Class VariablesDefine a group and a queue for Asynchronous Operations, as shown in Table 11-25.
Table 11-25Group and Queue Definition
//group and syncQueue are used to wait for the asynchronous function tocomplete
    let group = DispatchGroup()
    let syncQueue = DispatchQueue(label: "com.domain.app.sections")
Define saveBook FunctionThe code in Table 11-26 will save the book to the private iCloud database of the user. Note, everyuser will have their own copy of books.
Table 11-26Save Book Record to iCloud
//MARK: - Save Book Record
    /*
     saveBook method will save a book record to a SharedZone record zone.Please note sharedZone is created first if it is not created. We need a

--- Page 249 ---
custom zone for sharing record to other users
    */
    func saveBook(book:Book){
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        // Save the zone in the private database
        let container = CKContainer.default()
        let privateDB = container.privateCloudDatabase
        privateDB.save(ckRecordZoneID){ zone, error in
          if let error = error{
            print("Zone creation error: \(String(describing: error))")
          }else{
            print("Zone created: \(zone!)")
          }
        }
        let privateDatabase = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
        print(ckRecordZoneID.zoneID)
        let ckRecordID = CKRecord.ID(zoneID: ckRecordZoneID.zoneID)
        let aRecord = CKRecord(recordType: "Book", recordID: ckRecordID)
        aRecord["bookname"] = book.bookname
        aRecord["authorname"] = book.authorname
        aRecord["genre"] = book.genre
        aRecord["status"] = book.status
        aRecord["favorite"] = book.favorite
        privateDatabase.save(aRecord, completionHandler: { (record, error) ->Void in
            DispatchQueue.main.async {
                if let error = error {
                    print(error)
                }
                else{
                    self.syncQueue.async {
                        self.group.leave()
                    }
                }
            }
        })
    }
    1. func saveBook(book:Book){

--- Page 250 ---
The custom function to save the book to iCloud    2. let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
We will store this in a custom zone – we are naming this zone as SharedZone. This is important if we wantto share books with other users, as the default zone restricts any sharing options.    3. // Save the zone in the private database
    4. let container = CKContainer.default()
    5. let privateDB = container.privateCloudDatabase
    6. privateDB.save(ckRecordZoneID){ zone, error in
    7. if let error = error{
    8. print("Zone creation error: \(String(describing: error))")
    9. }else{
    10. print("Zone created: \(zone!)")
    11. }
    12. }
The preceding segment of code will create a SharedZone if it is not already existing.    13. let privateDatabase = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
    14. let ckRecordID = CKRecord.ID(zoneID: ckRecordZoneID.zoneID)
    15. let aRecord = CKRecord(recordType: "Book", recordID: ckRecordID)
From line 13–15, we are getting the handle to the private cloud database, getting the zone ID informationwhere the book will be stored, and then getting a handle to the record type “Book” – please note thisrecord type should match with the record type defined in iCloud for storing the book record.    16. aRecord["bookname"] = book.bookname
    17. aRecord["authorname"] = book.authorname
    18. aRecord["genre"] = book.genre
    19. aRecord["status"] = book.status
    20. aRecord["favorite"] = book.favorite
we are setting the attribute of the book record with the details of the book entered by user (notice we havepassed a book record)    21. privateDatabase.save(aRecord, completionHandler: { (record, error) ->Void in
    22. DispatchQueue.main.async {
    23. if let error = error {
    24. print(error)
    25. }
    26. else{
    27. self.syncQueue.async {
    28. self.group.leave()
    29. }
    30. }

--- Page 251 ---
    31. }
    32. })
In the preceding segment of code, we are passing an asynchronous request to save the book. When thecontrol returns, if it is an error, we are printing the error on console, if not, we are leaving the wait, whichwill then notify the parent queue in the calling function.    33. }
Reset FieldsThis is linked to the reset navigation bar tab bar button. As outlined in Table 11-27, whenclicked, it clears all input fields by assigning it an empty string.
Table 11-27Reset Function
/*
     When resetField function is called it empties all input fields and makesthe book text field the first responder.
     */
    func resetField(){
        bookTextField.text = ""
        authorTextField.text = ""
        genreTextField.text = ""
        statusTextField.text = ""
        bookTextField.becomeFirstResponder()
    }
SummaryIn this chapter, we revamped our Add Book Screen. We learned how to make a drop-downdynamic table view for Book Genre and Book Status input fields. We also learned how to useGroup Table view display when we showed genre grouped under Fiction and Nonfiction in theGenre TableView selection drop-down.In the next chapter, we will display the details of the Book and action we can take when auser taps on any book. This feature was not available in our Basic App.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 252 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_12

--- Page 253 ---
(1)
12. Book Details View Controller
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
This view controller is invoked when the user taps on a book either from the Main Display bystatus table view or from the favorite table view. The Book Detail view screen will have thefollowing functionalities:
Display the Book DetailsShare Book with other usersEdit Book DetailsDelete the BookAllow User to add Book NotesSet Book Reminder – will be displayed on iPhone notification centerMark the book as favorite
Initial SetupCreate the View ControllerCreate a view Controller with the name “BookViewController.”
Class InheritanceBeside the default UIViewController, we need to inherit the following delegates:
Table Delegate and Data Source delegate – this is for two tables we will use in our Book detailsscreen. The first one to display the selected book record, and the second table view fordisplaying Book Notes.A Custom defined Protocol RefreshBooksViewProtocol (Refer to Delegate in the previoussection) for refreshing the book details once the values are changed using Edit Book Detailsoptions.
Code outlined is in Table 12-1.
Table 12-1Class Inheritance
class BookViewController: UIViewController, UITabBarDelegate,UICloudSharingControllerDelegate, UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource, RefreshBooksViewProtocol {
Class VariablesWe will need the following types of variables
Access to variables/functions from our custom Common Functions and Database Functionclass.A variable of our custom class Book to hold the current display book value.

--- Page 254 ---
A Struct which will hold the current book details (Book Name, Author Name, Genre, ReadingStatus).A variable of custom book detail struct type to hold the book details to be iterated by tableview for display on the screen.A custom Protocol variable for the Book Detail View Controller to communicate back to MainDisplay View Controller.Code outlined is in Table 12-2.
Table 12-2Class Variables
//MARK: - Class Variables
    // the below two variables are used to access the common class functionsand variables
    let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
    let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
    // Book variable is to hold the Book details that will be displayed on thescreen. This is passed to the view controller when the Book Detail screenis invoked.
    var book = DatabaseFunctions.Book()
    // Defining a Structure to hold the Book Details field in a 2-Dimensionalarray. We will use a variable of this type to show it in a table view.
    struct BookDetails{
        var label:String!
        var value:[String]!
    }
    // Variable of type BookDetails structure to hold all book details in a 2Darray.
    var bookdetails:[BookDetails] = []
    //Defintion od a protocol variable, to refresh the Main Display screenwhen certain actions are taken on the book (For example mark the book asfavorite)
    var delegateBooksViewRefresh:RefreshBooksViewProtocol? = nil
Initial Load FunctionsWe will use the default View Load Function to call out the initial setup function and screen drawfunction, as shown in Table 12-3.
Table 12-3Setup Function
/*
     The setup function is used to do the following
     - the background of the view is set to white
     - setup the delegate for the tab bar

--- Page 255 ---
     - set the book table view, which uses a custom cell for displaying the bookdetails.
     - Call for a function setBookDetailswhcih will put the book fields data in two dimensional array
     - Two Tap Gesture event defined for the reminder screen button - save and r
     */
    func setup(){
        view.backgroundColor = .white
        tabBar.delegate = self
        bookTableView.delegate = self
        bookTableView.dataSource = self
        bookTableView.register(IconTableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier: "ta
        bookTableView.layer.borderWidth = 0
        bookTableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.white.cgColor
        bookTableView.separatorStyle = .none
        setBookDetails()
        let tapGestureRecognizerReminder = UITapGestureRecognizer(target: self,action: #selector(reminderImageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:)))
        reminderPopUpImageView.isUserInteractionEnabled = true
        reminderPopUpImageView.addGestureRecognizer(tapGestureRecognizerReminder)
        let tapGestureRecognizerResetReminder = UITapGestureRecognizer(target: selaction: #selector(reminderResetImageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:)))
        reminderResetImageView.isUserInteractionEnabled = true
        reminderResetImageView.addGestureRecognizer(tapGestureRecognizerResetRemin
    }
The setup function will perform the following:    • Set the background of the view controller to white.    • Set the Book Table Delegates.    • Create an array for displaying book details.    • Create a Tap Gesture for the Reminder setup pop view buttons (Save and Reset). Reminder we will learn isubsequent section.    1. func setup(){
This is our custom setup function    2. view.backgroundColor = .white
setting up the background of the view to white color    3. tabBar.delegate = self
tab bar delegate so that when user taps the button on the tab bar, relevant action is taken    4. bookTableView.delegate = self
    5. bookTableView.dataSource = self

--- Page 256 ---
    6. bookTableView.register(IconTableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"task")
    7. bookTableView.layer.borderWidth = 0
    8. bookTableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.white.cgColor
    9. bookTableView.separatorStyle = .none
setting up the Table View Delegate, data source, Cell, and Style. Note we are using a custom cell classIconTableViewCell    10. setBookDetails()
This is to set the book details array for the table view    11. let tapGestureRecognizerReminder = UITapGestureRecognizer(target: self,action: #selector(reminderImageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:)))
    12. reminderPopUpImageView.isUserInteractionEnabled = true
    13. reminderPopUpImageView.addGestureRecognizer(tapGestureRecognizerReminder)
    14. let tapGestureRecognizerResetReminder = UITapGestureRecognizer(target: selfaction: #selector(reminderResetImageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:)))
    15. reminderResetImageView.isUserInteractionEnabled = true
    16.reminderResetImageView.addGestureRecognizer(tapGestureRecognizerResetReminder
Setting up the tap gesture event for the Save button and Reset button on the reminder pop up. This is requirebecause Image does not have any system-defined events. The method reminderImageTapped is a custommethod that needs to be defined.    17. }
Setup
Set Book DetailsTable 12-4 will set all the Book class data fields.
Table 12-4Set Book Details Function
    func setBookDetails(){
        bookdetails.removeAll()
        var value = BookDetails()
        var detail:[String] = []
        detail.append(book.bookname!)
        value.label = "Book Name"
        value.value = detail
        bookdetails.append(value)
        value = BookDetails()
        detail = []
        detail.append(book.authorname!)
        value.label = "Author"

--- Page 257 ---
        value.value = detail
        bookdetails.append(value)
        value = BookDetails()
        detail = []
        value.label = "Genre"
        if(book.genre != nil){
            let local = book.genre.split(separator: ",")
            for val in local{
                detail.append(String(val))
            }
        }
        value.value = detail
        bookdetails.append(value)
        value = BookDetails()
        detail = []
        detail.append(book.status!)
        value.label = "Status"
        value.value = detail
        bookdetails.append(value)
        bookTableView.reloadData()
    }
The Table in the Book Detail view will show all the Book Data – Book Name, Author Name, Genre, andStatus. We want to show it like a table, and table loops through an array object to display all the values.This function creates an array for all book attributes. The array will have both the title and its respectivevalue(s).    1. func setBookDetails(){
This is the custom function called from the previously explained setup function    2. bookdetails.removeAll()
This variable is defined at the class level, and it is of type BookDetails custom Struct that we have definedat the class (See the variable section)    3. var value = BookDetails()
    4. var detail:[String] = []
    5. detail.append(book.bookname!)
    6. value.label = "Book Name"
    7. value.value = detail
    8. bookdetails.append(value)
We are populating the Book name in the first occurrence of the variable. The First row is the title of theattribute (in this case, it is “Book Name”) and the next row is the actual book name. The temp variable isadded to the class level bookDetails variable.    9. value = BookDetails()

--- Page 258 ---
  10. detail = []
  11. detail.append(book.authorname!)
    12. value.label = "Author"
    13. value.value = detail
    14. bookdetails.append(value)
We are populating the Book Author as the next occurrence of the variable. The First row is the title of theattribute (in this case, it is “Author Name”) and the next row is the actual author’s name. The temp variableis added to the class level bookDetails variable.    15. value = BookDetails()
    16. detail = []
    17. value.label = "Genre"
    18. if(book.genre != nil){
    19. let local = book.genre.split(separator: ",")
if we have more than one genre, it is stored separated by a comma in the database. This following line ofcode will split the genre into an array by looking for the comma as a separator.    20. for val in local{
    21. detail.append(String(val))
    22. }
    23. }
    24. value.value = detail
    25. bookdetails.append(value)
We are populating the Genre as the next occurrence of the variable. The First row is the title of theattribute (in this case, it is “Genre”) and the next row is the actual genre name. Notice, in future we canhave more than one genre for a book, hence the loop through the genre. The temp variable is added to theclass level bookDetails variable.    26. value = BookDetails()
    27. detail = []
    28. detail.append(book.status!)
    29. value.label = "Status"
    30. value.value = detail
    31. bookdetails.append(value)
We are populating the Book Status as the final occurrence of the variable. The First row is the title of theattribute (in this case, it is “Status”) and the next row is the actual status. The temp variable is added to theclass level bookDetails variable.    32. bookTableView.reloadData()
reloading the table to reflect the changes    33. }
Drawing the Screen

--- Page 259 ---
Once we complete the Book Detail code, the screen will appear like the one shown in Figure 12-1.
Figure 12-1Book Detail Screen
Screen ObjectsThe section provides the details of the UI Objects we will need to draw the screen. The Objectsare defined at the class level so that all methods can access them when required. The Ui Objectdetails of the Book Detail View Controller are in Table 12-5.
Table 12-5Book Details View Controller UI Objects
Type Description
UISpinner The spinner shows a wait symbol when the screen is refreshing
Tab Bar Bottom Tab Bar, which will allow user to exit the book detail screen to return to the maindisplay screen
BookLabel This is for displaying the book title on the top
UI Object Code Snippets

--- Page 260 ---
Table 12-6 has the code to define the UI Objects.
Table 12-6Book Details View Controller UI Objects Definition
let spinner:UIActivityIndicatorView = {
        let spinner = UIActivityIndicatorView(style: .large)
        spinner.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        return spinner
    }()
    private let tabBar:UITabBar = {
        let tabbar = UITabBar()
        tabbar.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tabbar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 171/255, green: 189/255,blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
        let saveSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 24,weight: .black)
        let saveImage = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill", withConfiguration:saveSymbolConfiguration)
        let save = UITabBarItem(title: "Save and Exit", image: saveImage,selectedImage: saveImage)
        save.tag = 0
        tabbar.setItems([save], animated: false)
        return tabbar
    }()
    let bookLabel:UILabel = {
        let label = UILabel()
        label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        label.backgroundColor = .white
        label.numberOfLines = 4
        label.textColor = .black
        label.textAlignment = .center
       return label
    }()
Table 12-7 has details on all six blocks on the top of the Book detail screen, each denoting aparticular function.
Table 12-7Six View Blocks UI Object Description
Type Description

--- Page 261 ---
Type Description
Share BlockShareButtonShare ImageViewShare TextLabel
This is to display the Share block. Button is for the block frame, Image to display the Icon,and label to display the label text.
Edit BlockShareButtonShare ImageViewShare TextLabel
This is to display the Edit block. Button is for the block frame, Image to display the Icon andlabel to display the label text
Delete BlockShareButtonShare ImageViewShare TextLabel
This is to display the Delete block. Button is for the block frame, Image to display the Iconand label to display the label text
Book NotesBlockShareButtonShare ImageViewShare TextLabel
This is to display the Book Notes block. Button is for the block frame, Image to display theIcon and label to display the label text
ReminderBlockShareButtonShare ImageViewShare TextLabel
This is to display the Reminder block. Button is for the block frame, Image to display the Iconand label to display the label text

--- Page 262 ---
Type Description
FavoriteBlockShareButtonShare ImageViewShare TextLabel
This is to display the Favorite block. Button is for the block frame, Image to display the Iconand label to display the label text
UI Object Code SnippetsTable 12-8 has the all six block definition.
Table 12-8Six View Blocks UI Object Definition
lazy var shareButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.backgroundColor = .white
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(shareButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return button
    }()
   let shareImageView: UIImageView = {
      let theImageView = UIImageView()
      theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "square.and.arrow.up.fill")
      theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
      return theImageView
   }()
   let shareTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()

--- Page 263 ---
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .center
      return label
   }()
    lazy var editButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.backgroundColor = .white
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(completeButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return button
    }()
    let editImageView: UIImageView = {
        let theImageView = UIImageView()
        theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "checkmark")
        theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        theImageView.tag = 0
       return theImageView
    }()
   let editTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black

--- Page 264 ---
       label.textAlignment = .center
      return label
   }()
    lazy var deleteButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.backgroundColor = .white
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(deleteButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return button
    }()
    let deleteImageView: UIImageView = {
        let theImageView = UIImageView()
        theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "trash.fill")
        theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        theImageView.tintColor = .red
        return theImageView
   }()
   let deleteTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .center
      return label
   }()
    lazy var notesButton:UIButton = {

--- Page 265 ---
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.backgroundColor = .white
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(notesButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return button
    }()
    let notesImageView: UIImageView = {
        let theImageView = UIImageView()
        theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName:"square.and.arrow.up.on.square.fill")
        theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        return theImageView
   }()
    let notesTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .center
      return label
    }()
    lazy var reminderButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.backgroundColor = .white

--- Page 266 ---
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(reminderButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return button
    }()
    let reminderImageView: UIImageView = {
        let theImageView = UIImageView()
        theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "lightbulb.fill")
        theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        return theImageView
   }()
   let reminderTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .center
      return label
   }()
    lazy var favButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.backgroundColor = .white
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor

--- Page 267 ---
        button.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(rect: button.bounds).cgPath
        button.layer.shadowRadius = 5
        button.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        button.layer.shadowOpacity = 1
        button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(frequencyButtonAction), for:.touchUpInside)
        return button
    }()
    let favImageView: UIImageView = {
        let theImageView = UIImageView()
        theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "calendar")
        theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        return theImageView
   }()
   let favTextLabel:UILabel = {
       let label = UILabel()
       label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       label.backgroundColor = .white
       label.numberOfLines = 4
       label.textColor = .black
       label.textAlignment = .center
      return label
   }()
Table 12-9 has the definition of the Table view, which will display the Book detail and popupview for setting reminder.
Table 12-9Table and Popup View Description
Type Description
TableView Table view for displaying the current Book Details (Book Name, Author Name, Genre, andreading status)
PopupView We will need this popup view when the user taps on the Reminder Block, this view will display adate control for setting the reminder.
LargePopupView
The Large Popup view is used to cover the entire screen with a light gray shade to avoid usersfrom accidentally clicking other action buttons on the backdrop screen when a reminder isdisplayed.
UI Object Code SnippetsTable 12-10 has the Table and Popup view definition.
Table 12-10Table and Popup View Definition

--- Page 268 ---
//MARK: - Table UI Object
    private let bookTableView:UITableView = {
        let tableView = UITableView()
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
        return tableView
    }()
    private let popUpView:UIView = {
        let uiView  = UIView()
        uiView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        uiView.backgroundColor = .white
        uiView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        uiView.layer.borderWidth = 1
        uiView.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        return uiView
    }()
    private let largerPopUpView:UIView = {
        let uiView  = UIView()
        uiView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        uiView.backgroundColor = .white
        uiView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        uiView.layer.borderWidth = 1
        uiView.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        return uiView
    }()
Table 12-11 has the definition of the Reminder popup screen UI Objects.
Table 12-11Reminder Popup Screen Description
Type Description
Reminder Label This is for the Reminder popup screen to set the reminder. This is a UI label to displaythe reminder prompt text
Reminder Picker Date Picker for setting the reminder
Reminder ImageView This button will save the reminder for the book in the iCloud repository.
Remind RestImage View This is the reset button to set the date to a back date so that no reminder is set(reminder works always for a future date)

--- Page 269 ---
UI Object Code SnippetsTable 12-12 has the Reminder Popup Screen definition.
Table 12-12Has the Reminder Popup Screen Definition
//MARK: - Reminder
    let reminderLabel:UILabel = {
        let label = UILabel()
        label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        label.backgroundColor = .white
        label.numberOfLines = 4
        label.textColor = .black
        label.textAlignment = .center
       return label
    }()
    private let reminderdatePicker:UIDatePicker = {
        let datePicker = UIDatePicker()
        datePicker.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        datePicker.datePickerMode = .dateAndTime
        datePicker.layer.borderColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 93/255, green:117/255, blue: 156/255, alpha: 1).cgColor
       return datePicker
    }()
    let reminderPopUpImageView: UIImageView = {
        let theImageView = UIImageView()
        theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "checkmark.square.fill")
        theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        return theImageView
   }()
    let reminderResetImageView: UIImageView = {
        let theImageView = UIImageView()
        theImageView.image = UIImage(systemName:"arrow.uturn.backward.square.fill")
        theImageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        return theImageView
    }()
Drawing ScreenThe code defined in Table 12-13 draws the six blocks on the top, table view for book details inthe middle and the tab bar at the bottom of the screen.

--- Page 270 ---
Table 12-13Drawing Top Six Blocks
//MARK: - Draw Screens
    /*
     The function taskScreen will draw the book screen with all 6 functionalblock and the book details table view and the tab bar
     */
    func taskScreen(){
        let screensize: CGRect = UIScreen.main.bounds
        let screenHeight = screensize.height
        let fontTask = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 20, weight: .bold)
        let attributesMain: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [
            .font: fontTask
        ]
        let fontText = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 14, weight: .bold)
        let attributesText: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [
            .font: fontText
        ]
        view.addSubview(bookLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookLabel, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 20, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0, heightAnchor: 80)
        bookLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:book.bookname.capitalized, attributes: attributesMain)
        view.addSubview(shareButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: shareButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 100, leftAnchor: 10, rightAnchor: -270, heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(shareImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: shareImageView,constraintField: shareButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 40, rightAnchor:-40, heightAnchor: 30)
        view.addSubview(shareTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: shareTextLabel,constraintField: shareButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor:-2, heightAnchor: 30)
        shareTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "Share",attributes: attributesText)
        view.addSubview(editButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: editButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 100, leftAnchor: 150, rightAnchor: -140, heightAnchor:80)
        view.addSubview(editImageView)

--- Page 271 ---
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: editImageView,constraintField: editButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 30, rightAnchor:-30, heightAnchor: 30)
        view.addSubview(editTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: editTextLabel,constraintField: editButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor: -2,heightAnchor: 30)
        editTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "Edit",attributes: attributesText)
        self.editImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "checkmark")
        view.addSubview(deleteButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: deleteButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 100, leftAnchor: 280, rightAnchor: -10, heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(deleteImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: deleteImageView,constraintField: deleteButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 35, rightAnchor:-30, heightAnchor: 30)
        view.addSubview(deleteTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: deleteTextLabel,constraintField: deleteButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor:-2, heightAnchor: 30)
        deleteTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "Delete",attributes: attributesText)
        view.addSubview(notesButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: notesButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 200, leftAnchor: 10, rightAnchor: -270, heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(notesImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: notesImageView,constraintField: notesButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 40, rightAnchor:-40, heightAnchor: 30)
        view.addSubview(notesTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: notesTextLabel,constraintField: notesButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor:-2, heightAnchor: 30)
        notesTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "Book Notes",attributes: attributesText)
        view.addSubview(reminderButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: reminderButton,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 200, leftAnchor: 150, rightAnchor: -140,heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(reminderImageView)

--- Page 272 ---
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: reminderImageView,constraintField: reminderButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 35, rightAnchor:-40, heightAnchor: 30)
        view.addSubview(reminderTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: reminderTextLabel,constraintField: reminderButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor:-2, heightAnchor: 30)
        reminderTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string:"Reminder", attributes: attributesText)
        view.addSubview(favButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: favButton, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 200, leftAnchor: 280, rightAnchor: -10, heightAnchor: 80)
        view.addSubview(favImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: favImageView, constraintField:favButton, topAnchor: 5, leftAnchor: 35, rightAnchor: -30, heightAnchor:30)
        view.addSubview(favTextLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: favTextLabel, constraintField:favButton, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor: -2, heightAnchor: 30)
        favTextLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "MarkFavorite", attributes: attributesText)
        if(book.favorite == 1){
            favButton.backgroundColor = .lightGray
            favTextLabel.backgroundColor = .lightGray
        }else{
            favButton.backgroundColor = .white
            favTextLabel.backgroundColor = .white
        }
        view.addSubview(bookTableView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTableView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 300, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor: -5,heightAnchor: screenHeight - 400)
        view.addSubview(tabBar)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: tabBar, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: screenHeight - 80, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 60)
        tabBar.unselectedItemTintColor = .blue
    }

--- Page 273 ---
Displaying the Book DetailsIn this section, we will learn how to display the table view with the book data (Book Name,Author Name, Genre, and Reading Status).As we have learned before, we have created a variable bookDetails (Swift is case sensitive)of our custom Struct type BookDetails, which will hold all book details to be displayed in a tableview. The Table View will have the following functions:
Number of SectionsThe table will have four sections, one each for Book Name, Author Name, Genre, and ReadingStatus. Table 12-14 has the relevant code to let the table know how many sections are there inthe table.
Table 12-14Table View – Number of Sections
/*
      Each Field is treated as a section. The numberOfSections function willlet the table how many section to display
    */
    func numberOfSections(in tableView: UITableView) -> Int {
        return bookdetails.count
    }
Number of RowsEvery section will only have one row. However, the genre can have more than one genre(currently not Implemented). Table 12-15 has all the relevant code.
Table 12-15Table View – Number of Rows in Section
/*
     numberOfRowsInSection will let the table know how many rows are in eachsection.
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section:Int) -> Int {
        return self.bookdetails[section].value.count
    }
Display the TableWe need to note a few things while displaying the table:
We are using a custom cell. The custom cell will display the display field title, an icon toenhance readability and the value (see next section for the definition of custom cell).Four different icons will be displayed based on the title field (Book name, Author name, Genre,and Reading Status).

--- Page 274 ---
Table 12-16 has all the relevant code to display the values.
Table 12-16Table View – Cell for Row At
/*
     cellForRowAt will display the records with an icon for each type of field
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) UITableViewCell {
        let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "task", for: indexas! IconTableViewCell
        //cell.iconLabelButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(iconButtonAction).touchUpInside)
        cell.iconLabelButton.setTitleColor(.blue, for: .normal)
        cell.iconLabelButton.setTitle(bookdetails[indexPath.section].value[indexPafor: .normal)
        cell.iconLabelButton.tag = indexPath.row
        cell.iconLabelButton.accessibilityLabel = bookdetails[indexPath.section].l
        cell.iconLabelButton.accessibilityIdentifier = String(indexPath.section)
        switch bookdetails[indexPath.section].label{
            case "Book Name":
                cell.leftImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "book.fill")
            case "Author":
                cell.leftImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "person")
            case "Genre":
                cell.leftImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "pencil")
            default:
                cell.leftImageView.image = UIImage(systemName: "square.and.pencil")
        }
        return cell
    }
Row HeightWe are setting every row height to 40 pixels, as shown in Table 12-17.
Table 12-17TableView – Height for Row At Index
/*
     The height of the each row is set to 40 pixel
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> CGFloat {

--- Page 275 ---
        return 40.0
   }
Header ViewThe section header will have a custom label to display the section label bold and with a largefont size as shown in Table 12-18
Table 12-18TableView – Header View
/*
     Each Section of the table view will have a title which will be displayedin this section
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, viewForHeaderInSection section:Int) -> UIView? {
        let headerView = UIView.init(frame: CGRect.init(x: 0, y: 0, width:tableView.frame.width, height: 50))
        headerView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 245/255, green: 245/255,blue: 245/255, alpha: 1)
        let label = UILabel()
        label.frame = CGRect.init(x: 15, y: 0, width: headerView.frame.width-10,height: headerView.frame.height-10)
        label.text = bookdetails[section].label
        label.textColor = .black
        label.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 18)
        headerView.addSubview(label)
        return headerView
    }
Header HeightWe are setting the height of the header to 40 Pixels, as shown in Table 12-19.
Table 12-19TableView – Header Height
/*
     The height of the each section is set to 40 pixel
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForHeaderInSection section:Int) -> CGFloat {
        return 40.0
    }
Defining the Custom Cell

--- Page 276 ---
The Book Detail table view uses a custom cell to display the book record. The cell definition hasa custom label and an image which will provide an icon notation to the displayed value. The cellin a table is a view and we can customize the view to display data as we desire to. This class willhave the code required to draw every cell with the defined custom layout. This custom cell isthen attached to the Table cell type while defining the table(bookTableView.register(IconTableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier: "task"). It isreferred to again in the table view function cellForRowAt.Follow the following steps to create the custom cell.
Create a custom class called IconTableViewCell of type UI Table View Cell, as shown in Table12-20.
Table 12-20UITableViewCell – Class Definition
class IconTableViewCell: UITableViewCell {
Define a class level variable to get access to the Common Function custom class. The methodin Common Function will be used to plot the objects in the cell, as shown in Table 12-21.
Table 12-21UITableViewCell – Class Level Variable Definition
/*
    Variable to access the CommonFunctions class to draw the UI Object incell
    */
    let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
Define three UI Objects – a Button, an Image, and a label. The Image will be contained withinthe button. Although we do not want to take any action on the click event. We are doing this sothat in future we need any event, we can easily use the default click event. The Label is todisplay the value. The relevant code is shown in Table 12-22.
Table 12-22UITableViewCell – UI Object Definition
//MARK: - All Display View Items
    /*
     An UI Button to hold the image
    */
    let iconButton:UIButton = {
      let button = UIButton()
      button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
      button.contentEdgeInsets = UIEdgeInsets(top: 0, left: 5, bottom: 0,right: 0)
      button.contentHorizontalAlignment = .left
      button.tintColor = .black
      button.clipsToBounds = true
      button.isEnabled = false

--- Page 277 ---
      return button
    }()
    /*
     An image view to show the Book Field image
    */
    let leftImageView: UIImageView = {
        let imageView = UIImageView()
        imageView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        imageView.tintColor = .blue
        return imageView
    }()
    /*
     A label to show the book field data
    */
    let iconLabelButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.contentEdgeInsets = UIEdgeInsets(top: 0, left: 5, bottom: 2,right: 0)
        button.contentHorizontalAlignment = .left
        button.contentVerticalAlignment = .center
        button.setTitleColor(.black, for: .normal)
        button.titleLabel?.font =  UIFont(name: "Helvetica", size: 14)
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        return button
  }()
Draw the cell Object. The SetSelected is the default cell method which is called to draw thecell, as shown in Table 12-23. This completed our custom class definition.
Table 12-23UITableViewCell – Draw Cell Object
/*
    This function is called every time the table cell is drawn. The functiondraws the an Icon and put the Book Data next to it.
    */
    override func setSelected(_ selected: Bool, animated: Bool) {
      super.setSelected(selected, animated: animated)
      contentView.addSubview(iconButton)
      commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: iconButton, constraintField:contentView, topAnchor: 2, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor: -345, heightAnchor:

--- Page 278 ---
20)
        contentView.addSubview(leftImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: leftImageView,constraintField: contentView, topAnchor: 6, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor:-360, heightAnchor: 20)
        contentView.addSubview(iconLabelButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: iconLabelButton,constraintField: contentView, topAnchor: 2, leftAnchor: 20, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 30)
    }
Tab Bar FunctionReturn to the BookViewController and add the code as shown in Table 12-24. We have a tabbar at the bottom of the screen with a button to close the current screen and return to the maindisplay view. The following code dismisses the BooKViewController screen.
Table 12-24Tab Bar Function
//MARK: - Tab Bar Function
    /*
     When the tab bar button is clicked the screen is dismissed and thecontrol will be returned to the main display view
     */
    func tabBar(_ tabBar: UITabBar, didSelect item: UITabBarItem) {
        dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
    }
SummaryThis chapter was not introduced in the Book Tracker Basic App (Part I). In this chapter, welearned how to display details content of a book (Book Name, Author Name, Book Genre,Reading Status) and provide a list of actions (Share the Book, Edit Book Details, Delete the Book,Take Book Notes, Set Book Reminder, and mark it as Favorite).The next six chapters are dedicated to each of the actions we have on the Book Detail ViewController.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 279 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_13

--- Page 280 ---
(1)
13. Sharing Book with Other Users
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
One of the functionalities iCloud offers is sharing content with other users. In the CloudKitOverview section, a brief outline of the share concept was discussed. In this section, we willlearn the actual implementation, where we will share a book with another user of the BookTracker App. The App had a screen dedicated for Shared books where all shared books by otherusers are displayed, as shown in Figure 13-1.
Figure 13-1Screen Simulator Book Tracking App
Before we can see the books in the Shared Books, we need to first learn how to share a book.Our Book Detail screen first option block is Share, as shown in Figure 13-2. This section we willlearn how to share a book. The Shared Books Display we will learn in the next chapter.

--- Page 281 ---
Figure 13-2Screen Simulator Book Tracking App – Share Book Option
Import CloudKitImporting the CloudKit toolkit is required to get access to all native iCloud functions, as shownin Table 13-1.
Table 13-1Import Cloudkit
import CloudKit
Share Button Click EventWhile defining the shared button, we assigned a custom method called “shareButtonAction” tothe button Touch Up Inside event. The method explained in Table 13-2 is executed when thetouchupinside event on the button is triggered by user button tap action.
Table 13-2Share Button Click Event Action Method
/*
     When the user clicks on the Share Button the following function will betriggered. It will do the following:
     - give the block a bouncing effect
     - call the functions shareRecord to allow user to Share the current bookwith other users and wait for its completion

--- Page 282 ---
     */
    @objc func shareButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        animation(sender: sender)
        self.shareRecord()
        self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            }
    }
    /*
     shareRecord function will do the folliwng
     - Query the Book Repository for locating the book record
     - Invoke a Share Record Window
     - Send the message to the shared user(s)
     */
    1. @objc func shareButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
Custom function attached to the Share Block button touchupinside event    2. animation(sender: sender)
animation will help to show a bounce effect. We will learn about it later.    3. self.shareRecord()
This method will help us to share the record. We will learn this method in the next section.    4. self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
    5. self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
    6. }
This is an await block for the share block to finish the work    7. }
Share Record FunctionsThis function will help share the book with other users. The function will prompt a screen forsharing the book and it will offer multiple mediums to do the same (e.g., iMessage, WhatsApp).The recipient user will get the request on the medium chosen by the sender (for exampleiMessage). The recipient user can then open the request, which will prompt the user to eitheraccept or reject the request. When the recipient user accepts the record, the book record getsstored in a Shared Database, which both users can view/modify. Any update done by any userwill be visible to all shared users. The relevant code is explained in Table 13-3.
Table 13-3BookShare Function
func shareRecord(){
        DispatchQueue.main.async {
            var share: CKShare? = nil

--- Page 283 ---
            let privateDB = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
            var pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
            pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname == %@ && authorname == %@",self.book.bookname, self.book.authorname)
            let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
            let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
            let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
            operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
            CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
            var recordToShare:CKRecord?
            operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
                recordToShare = record
            }
            operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self] (cursor, error) in
                DispatchQueue.main.async {
                    if let error = error {
                        print(error)
                    }else {
                        share  = CKShare(rootRecord: recordToShare!)
                        share![CKShare.SystemFieldKey.title] = "Sharing Book" as CKRecordValue
                        share![CKShare.SystemFieldKey.shareType] = "Book" as CKRecordValue
                        let shareController = UICloudSharingController { shareController,
                        preparationCompletionHandler in
                            let modRecordsOp = CKModifyRecordsOperation(recordsToSave: [recordToshare!],
                             recordIDsToDelete: nil)
                            modRecordsOp.modifyRecordsCompletionBlock = { records, recordIDs, e
                                if error != nil {
                                    print("modifyRecordsOp error:", error!)
                                }
                                preparationCompletionHandler(share, CKContainer.default(), error)
                            }
                            privateDB.add(modRecordsOp)
                        }
                        shareController.delegate = self
                        shareController.availablePermissions = [.allowPrivate, .allowReadWri
                        shareController.popoverPresentationController?.sourceView =self.shareImageView

--- Page 284 ---
                        self.presentationController?.presentedViewController.present(shareCoanimated: true, completion: nil)
                    }
                }
            }
             self.databaseFunctions.group.leave()
        }
    }
    1. func shareRecord(){
Custom function called from Share Block button touch up inside event.    2. DispatchQueue.main.async {
We are creating a queue to help perform the share record execution to happen asynchronously    3. var share: CKShare? = nil
We will define a local method variable called share of type CKShare. This will show the Record Share Screen t    4. let privateDB = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
    5. var pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
    6. print(self.book.bookname!)
    7. print(self.book.authorname!)
    8. pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname == %@ && authorname == %@",self.book.bookname, self.book.authorname)
    9. let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
    10. let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
    11. let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
    12. operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
    13. CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
    14. var recordToShare:CKRecord?
    15. operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
    16. recordToShare = record
    17. }
The book we are going to share is currently in the user’s private Database. We are using the preceding methodaccess to the database and search for the book that needs to be shared. Once we query and locate the record, store thar record in a CKRecord variable type called recordToShare    18. operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self] (cursor, error) in
As this is an asynchronous call, once the query is completed, it will return to this block of code    19. DispatchQueue.main.async {
    20. if let error = error {
    21. print(error)
If there is an error in fetching the record, we will print it on the console.
    22. }else {

--- Page 285 ---
If there is no error, then the following code will be executed.    23. share = CKShare(rootRecord: recordToShare!)
The preceding line of code is making the book record we queried to a Shared Record type    24. share![CKShare.SystemFieldKey.title] = "Sharing Book" as CKRecordValue?
This is a prompt which will be displayed on the shared popup screen. The title of the screen – we are naming Book”    25. share![CKShare.SystemFieldKey.shareType] = "Book" as CKRecordValue
Before sharing, we need to inform the iCloud database about the record type. Our book is of type Book defineiCloud Database.    26. let shareController = UICloudSharingController { shareController,
    27. preparationCompletionHandler in
    28. let modRecordsOp = CKModifyRecordsOperation(recordsToSave: [recordToShare!share!],
    29. recordIDsToDelete: nil)
We are creating a Sharing Controller screen which will be shown to the user. Also note, we need to mark this rthe Private Database as shared. When the user accepts the request, it will be then stored in a shared database    30. modRecordsOp.modifyRecordsCompletionBlock = { records, recordIDs, error in
    31. if error != nil {
    32. print("modifyRecordsOp error:", error!)
    33. }
    34. preparationCompletionHandler(share, CKContainer.default(), error)
    35. }
    36. privateDB.add(modRecordsOp)
    37. }
The preceding line of code commits the book record to the database    38. shareController.delegate = self
    39. shareController.availablePermissions = [.allowPrivate, .allowReadWrite]
    40. shareController.popoverPresentationController?.sourceView = self.shareImag
    41. self.presentationController?.presentedViewController.present(shareControlanimated: true, completion: nil)
Line 38–41 will display the share screen    42. }
    43. }
    44. }
    45. self.databaseFunctions.group.leave()
Once the sharing is done, we will leave the queue and return the control to the waiting block.    46. }
    47. }

--- Page 286 ---
Cloud Sharing Call Back FunctionWe need to implement two cloud sharing call back functions, as shown in Table 13-4. The firstone is to display an error if there is one, and the second one is a call back to display a title on thescreen. In our example, we will display the book name as a title prompt to the user.
Table 13-4Cloud Sharing Callback Functions
/*
     If there is error in saving the Shared record the following function iscalled, which prints the error on the screen
     */
    func cloudSharingController(_ csc: UICloudSharingController,failedToSaveShareWithError error: Error) {
        print("failed to save: \(error.localizedDescription)")
    }
    /*
    The following function returns the title that need to be shown on theshared window popup
    */
    func itemTitle(for csc: UICloudSharingController) -> String? {
        return "Sharing MyLibrary Book: \(self.book.bookname!)"
    }
SummarySharing the book with another Book Tracker App user is a cool feature. In this chapter, welearned how to Share records securely amongst users. We also learned the concepts of Privateand shared iCloud databases in this chapter.In the next chapter, we will learn how to Edit the Details of a book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 287 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of SpringerNature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_14
14. Edit Book
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
In the Book detail screen, the Edit Book block is the second block next to theShare Book block. This block of functions helps in modifying the bookattributes (Book Name, Author Name, Genre, and Status). While defining theEdit Book button, a custom function was assigned on the Touch Up InsideEvent called “completeButtonAction”. When the user taps on the block codeshown in Table 14-1 the Touch Up Inside function is invoked which opens theEdit Book View Controller.
Calling the Edit View Controller
Table 14-1 Calling the Edit View Controller
/*
     When the user clicks on the Edit Button the following
function will be triggered. It will do the following:
     - give the block a bouncing effect
     - Invoke the EditBookViewController view controller by
passing the book record to the controller. Also, please note
it set the delegate protocol, which after editing will
refresh the data on the current view controller
     */
    @objc func completeButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        let viewController = EditBookViewController()

--- Page 288 ---
        viewController.delegateBookViewRefresh = self
        viewController.book = book
        viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
        viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
        self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion:
nil)
    }
Notice that we are passing the current Book to the Edit View Controller. This is topre-populate the Edit View Controller with the current book record values.
Edit View Controller
This View controller is exactly like the Add View Controller. The onlydifference is it takes the Book details and pre-populates the screen with thebook details’ record values. Once saved, it calls the update Book Functionsinstead of Add Book Function. In this section, we will only learn about theadditional changes required to update a book detail. If you need to learn thecomplete implementation, please refer to the Add Book Section code details.Add a new View Controller class and name it as “EditViewController”. Andadd the code shown in Table 14-2.
Class Level Variable
Table 14-2 Class Level Variables
// A variable of type Book to store the book data to be
saved to the repository
    var book = DatabaseFunctions.Book()
    // We also have a variable to keep the original book vales
intact as the editing will change it
    var originalBook = DatabaseFunctions.Book()
    // A Delegate to let the main display know the change post
editing is saved
    var delegateBookViewRefresh:RefreshBooksViewProtocol? = nil
    1.  var book = DatabaseFunctions.Book()

--- Page 289 ---
This variable holds the book details which is passed by the calling function from theEdit Book Block of Book Details View Controller. The update book details will also bestored in this class variable
    2.  var originalBook = DatabaseFunctions.Book()
This variable holds the original book details
    3.  var delegateBookViewRefresh:RefreshBooksViewProtocol? =
nil
This is the reference to delegate. Once the update is done and the screen is dismissed,we need to update the Book Detail view with the updates. Refer to CustomDelegation section to learn more.
Navigation Bar
There is no change in the Navigation Bar definition except for the Title of theBar, as shown in Table 14-3.
Table 14-3 Navigation Bar Definition
private let addNavigationBar:UINavigationBar = {
        let navigationBar = UINavigationBar()
        navigationBar.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints =
false
        navigationBar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red:
171/255, green: 189/255, blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
        let navItem = UINavigationItem(title: "Edit a Book")
        let resetSymbolConfiguration =
UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 15, weight: .black)
        let resetImage = UIImage(systemName:
"arrowshape.turn.up.left.fill", withConfiguration:
resetSymbolConfiguration)
        let editItem  = UIBarButtonItem(image: resetImage,
landscapeImagePhone: resetImage, style: .plain, target: nil,
action: #selector(resetButtonAction))
        let saveSymbolConfiguration =
UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 20, weight: .black)
        let saveImage = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill",
withConfiguration: saveSymbolConfiguration)

--- Page 290 ---
        let saveItem  = UIBarButtonItem(image: saveImage,
landscapeImagePhone: saveImage, style: .plain, target: nil,
action: #selector(saveButtonAction))
        navItem.rightBarButtonItem = saveItem
        navItem.leftBarButtonItem = editItem
        navigationBar.setItems([navItem], animated: false)
        return navigationBar
    }()
Setup
The setup is the same as defined in the Add View Controller. The only changeis assignment of the book fields with the values passed to the class(Highlighted section). Note, we need to show user what they need to edit, asshown in Table 14-4.
Table 14-4 Setup Function
func setup(){
        genreTableView.delegate = self
        genreTableView.dataSource = self
        genreTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self,
forCellReuseIdentifier: "genre")
        genreTableView.layer.borderWidth = 0
        genreTableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.white.cgColor
        genreTableView.separatorStyle = .none
        statusTableView.delegate = self
        statusTableView.dataSource = self
        statusTableView.register(UITableViewCell.self,
forCellReuseIdentifier: "status")
        statusTableView.layer.borderWidth = 0
        statusTableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.white.cgColor
        statusTableView.separatorStyle = .none
        commonVariables.setGenres()

--- Page 291 ---
        commonVariables.setStatuses()
        bookTextField.text = book.bookname
        authorTextField.text = book.authorname
        genreTextField.text = book.genre
        statusTextField.text = book.status
        bookTextField.delegate = self
        authorTextField.delegate = self
        originalBook.bookname = book.bookname
        originalBook.authorname = book.authorname
    }
Save Book
The only change in the save book project is calling the Update Book Databasefunctions instead of Add Book (highlighted Section). Also, the delegate callsto refresh the data on the Book Detail view, as shown in Table 14-5.
Table 14-5 Save Book
/*
    This function updates the book values in the repository and
post saving to provides an alert that the book is saved.
    */
    fileprivate func saveBook(){
        databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        databaseFunctions.updateBook(orginalBook: originalBook,
book:book)
        databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Save
Alert", message: "Book '\(self.book.bookname!)' is Saved",
preferredStyle: .alert)
            // Create the actions
            let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:
UIAlertAction.Style.default) { [self]

--- Page 292 ---
                    UIAlertAction in
                self.delegateBookViewRefresh?.refreshData(book:
self.book)
                self.dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
            }
            // Add the actions
            alertController.addAction(okAction)
            self.resetField()
            // Present the controller
            self.present(alertController, animated: true,
completion: nil)
        }
    }
Update Book Database Functions
This function is in our Common DatabaseFunctions Class. It queries theDatabase first, and once found, it updates the record, as shown in Table 14-6.
Table 14-6 Update Book Record
/*
     update book updates the book with new values provided when
Edit Book Record is performed
     */
    func updateBook(orginalBook: Book, book: Book){
        let pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname == %@ &&
authorname == %@",orginalBook.bookname,
orginalBook.authorname)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID

--- Page 293 ---
        let sharedDatabase =
CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
           CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
           operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
               record["bookname"] = book.bookname
               record["authorname"] = book.authorname
               record["genre"] =  book.genre
               record["status"] = book.status
               sharedDatabase.save(record, completionHandler: {
(record, error) -> Void in
                   DispatchQueue.main.async {
                       if let error = error {
                           print(error)
                       }
                       else {
                           self.syncQueue.async {
                               let book = Book()
                               book.bookname = record!.object(forKey:
"bookname")! as? String
                               book.authorname = record!.object(forKey:
"authorname")! as? String
                               book.genre =  record!.object(forKey: "genre")! as?
String
                               book.status = record!.object(forKey: "status")!
as? String
                               self.book = book
                               self.group.leave()
                           }
                       }
                   }
               })
           }

--- Page 294 ---
    }
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to change the Book Details (Book Name andAuthor Name) and select a different value for Genre and Book ReadingStatus. We also learned how to update a book record in iCloud database.In the next chapter, we will learn to delete a book from iCloud repository.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 295 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_15

--- Page 296 ---
(1)
15. Book Delete
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
The third option on the Block Menu is deleting a Book. When a user clicks on the Delete Block,“deleteButtonAction” custom function is invoked, which provides an alert to the user askingfor his/her confirmation to delete the book. If users say “YES” the book is deleted.Following is the progress made so far on Book Detail Screen:
Share Book Record – CompleteEdit Book Record – In ProgressDelete Book RecordBook NotesSetting Book ReminderMarking Book as Favorite
Delete Block Button Action
/*When the user clicks on the Delete Button the following function will betriggered. It will do the following:
     - give the block a bouncing effect
     - call the functions deleteBook to allow user to Share the current bookwith other users and wait for its completion
     */
    @objc func deleteButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        animation(sender: sender)
        deleteBook()
    }
    1.  @objc func deleteButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
The button Touch Up Inside Event defined for the delete block during the view definition
    2.  animation(sender: sender)
animation will help to show a bounce effect. We will learn about it later.
    3.  deleteBook()
Custom function to Delete the book
    4.  }

--- Page 297 ---
Custom Delete Book Function
/*
    deleteBook function will prompt the user with the record to be deletedAlert. If user says OK, it will delete the record from the repository andreturn to the main screen
    */
    func deleteBook(){
        let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Delete Book Action",message: "Are you sure you want to delete \(self.book.bookname ?? "")?",preferredStyle: .alert)
     // Create the actions
        let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
                UIAlertAction in
            self.databaseFunctions.deleteBook(bookname: self.book.bookname,authorname: self.book.authorname)
            self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
            self.commonFunctions.startSpinner(view: self.view!, color: 1,spinner: self.spinner)
            self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
                self.commonFunctions.stopSpinner(spinner: self.spinner)
                self.delegateBooksViewRefresh?.refreshData()
                self.dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
            }
        }
        let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style:UIAlertAction.Style.cancel) {
                UIAlertAction in
        }
        // Add the actions
        alertController.addAction(okAction)
        alertController.addAction(cancelAction)
        // Present the controller
        self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
    }
The function shows an alert for book deletion, and when the user accepts to delete, it calls theDatabaseFunctions class deleteBook Function. After deletion is completed, the control returns to thewaiting block and executes the following:

--- Page 298 ---
    •  Dismisses the current screen and returns to the main screen
    •  And refreshes the screen using the delegate protocol

--- Page 299 ---
Delete Book Database FunctionIn the DatabaseFunctions class, add the following deleteBook function.
// MARK: - Delete Book
    /*
     deleteBook function deletes a book from the repository based on the bookname and author name
    */
    func deleteBook(bookname: String, authorname: String){
        var taskRecords = [CKRecord.ID]()
        let pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname == %@ && authorname == %@",bookname, authorname)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
        operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
            taskRecords.append(record.recordID)
        }
        operation.queryCompletionBlock = { (cursor, error) in
        DispatchQueue.main.async {
            let modifyRecordsOperation =CKModifyRecordsOperation.init(recordsToSave: nil, recordIDsToDelete:taskRecords)
            modifyRecordsOperation.modifyRecordsCompletionBlock = { records,recordIDs, error in  DispatchQueue.main.async {
               if let error = error {
                   print(error)
               }else{
                   self.syncQueue.async {
                       self.deleteBookNotes(bookname: bookname)
                   }
               }
            }}
            CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(modifyRecordsOperation)
        }}
    }

--- Page 300 ---
The function accepts two parameters: book name and author name. It queries the user's private databasefor its existence. If found, it deletes the record, and calls another function Delete Notes (we will learnabout it in the next section) to delete all related book notes and then returns to the calling function.
SummaryIn this chapter, we learned how to permanently delete a record from the iCloud repository. Inthe next chapter, we will learn how to take additional notes on the book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 301 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_16

--- Page 302 ---
(1)
16. Book Notes
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
In the Book Detail View, the Book Notes allows users to take multiple notes on the book. Thenotes are displayed on a new screen. Users can add and delete notes from the popup screen.Figure 16-1 provides the screen layout of the Book Notes screen.
Figure 16-1Book Notes Layout Screen
Following is the progress made so far on Book Detail Screen:
Share Book Record - CompleteEdit Book Record - In ProgressDelete Book RecordBook NotesSetting Book Reminder

--- Page 303 ---
Marking Book as FavoriteBook Notes Touch Up Inside EventThe Book Notes button has a “notesButtonAction” function attached to the Touch Up Insideevent. The function defined in Table 16-1 is triggered when user taps the Book Notes button.
Table 16-1Notes UI Button Definition
//MARK: - Book Notes
    /*
     When the user clicks on the Book Notes Button the following function willbe triggered. It will do the following:
     - give the block a bouncing effect
     - Invoke the BookNotesViewController view controller by passing the bookrecord to the controller.
     */
    @objc func notesButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        let viewController = BookNotesViewController()
        viewController.book = book
        viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
        viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
        self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion: nil)
    }
The function pops up the book Notes screen. It takes the book record as a reference so that it knows whichbook it must store the notes for.

--- Page 304 ---
Book Notes View ControllerCreate a View Controller with the name “BookNotesViewController”. This view controller willinherit Table View Controller delegates to display Book Notes and a Tab Bar delegate to dismissthe screen. Table 16-2 has the relevant code.
Table 16-2Class Inheritance
class BookNotesViewController: UIViewController,UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource, UITabBarDelegate {
Class Level VariablesTable 16-3 has the class level variables details.
Table 16-3Class Variables
//MARK: - Class Variables
    // the below three variables are used to access the common class functionsand variables
    let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
    let commonVariables = CommonVariables()
    let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
    // A variable of type Book to store the book data to be saved to therepository
    var book = DatabaseFunctions.Book()
    // A variable of type Booknote to store the book notes to be saved to therepository. Please note, every book note is a record.
    var booknotes = [DatabaseFunctions.Booknote]()
Variables defined for    •  provide access to Common Functions, Variables and Database classes    •  Book Class to capture the book record    •  Book Notes variable of type Booknote (defined in Database function class – see below)

--- Page 305 ---
Book Notes VariableOpen the DataBaseFunctions Class and add the lines of code as shown in Table 16-4 at classlevel.
Table 16-4Class Definition
/*
    The Class Booknote mimics the Booknote table we have created in our iCloudRepository.
    */
    class Booknote{
        var bookname:String!
        var notes:String!
        var authorname:String!
        var bookid:CKRecord.ID!
        var recordID: CKRecord.ID!
    }
    /*
     booknotes is an array variable of type Booknote. booknote is a variableof type Booknote
     */
    var booknotes = [Booknote]()
    var booknote = Booknote()
Booknote Class has notes as a String variable to store notes. It also has reference to the Book and theauthor’s name and the unique Record id of the book for which the note is stored.The booknotes is a local array defined to store all booknotes(for query purposes) and a booknotevariable to save the current book note.
Class Level UI ObjectsWe will need the following UI Objects for this view controller. The code is shown in Table 16-5.
A Text View to accept user inputs on notesA large popup view to cover the background screenA popup view to display the book notes popup displayA Navigation bar to save and exit the popup screenA Tab Bar to exit the Book Notes ScreenA Table view to display the book notes. The first row will offer an option to add a Book Note
Table 16-5UI Objects
//MARK: - UI Object
    /*

--- Page 306 ---
     Following UI Object will be used to draw the screen:
     - a Text View to take free flow text as notes
     - a largepopup to cover the Book Notes screen
     - a popup which will show the Text view and a navigation bar to save thebook note when Add notes (the first row of the Book Note table) option isclicked
     - A Navigation bar with two buttons - one to close the popup withoutsaving and the other button to save and close the book note
     - A Tab bar with a button to close the screen
     - A Book Notes table view to show the avaiable book notes
    */
    private let bookTextView:UITextView = {
        let textView = UITextView()
        textView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        textView.backgroundColor = .white
        textView.textColor = .black
        return textView
    }()
    private let largerPopUpView:UIView = {
        let uiView  = UIView()
        uiView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        uiView.backgroundColor = .white
        uiView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        uiView.layer.borderWidth = 1
        uiView.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        return uiView
    }()
    private let popUpView:UIView = {
        let uiView  = UIView()
        uiView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        uiView.backgroundColor = .white
        uiView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        uiView.layer.borderWidth = 1
        uiView.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        return uiView
    }()
    private let createNotesNavigationBar:UINavigationBar = {
        let navigationBar = UINavigationBar()

--- Page 307 ---
        navigationBar.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        navigationBar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 122/255, green:73/255, blue: 73/255, alpha: 1)
        let navItem = UINavigationItem(title: "Add Note")
        let cancelSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize:25, weight: .black)
        let cancelImage = UIImage(systemName: "arrowshape.turn.up.left.fill",withConfiguration: cancelSymbolConfiguration)
        let cancelItem  = UIBarButtonItem(image: cancelImage,landscapeImagePhone: cancelImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action:#selector(notesCancelButtonAction))
        navItem.leftBarButtonItem = cancelItem
        let saveSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 25,weight: .black)
        let saveImage = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill", withConfiguration:saveSymbolConfiguration)
        let saveItem  = UIBarButtonItem(image: saveImage, landscapeImagePhone:saveImage, style: .plain, target: nil, action:#selector(notesSaveActionButton))
        navItem.rightBarButtonItem = saveItem
        navigationBar.setItems([navItem], animated: false)
        return navigationBar
    }()
    private let tabBar:UITabBar = {
        let tabbar = UITabBar()
        tabbar.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tabbar.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 171/255, green: 189/255,blue: 217/255, alpha: 1)
        let saveSymbolConfiguration = UIImage.SymbolConfiguration(pointSize: 24,weight: .black)
        let saveImage = UIImage(systemName: "s.circle.fill", withConfiguration:saveSymbolConfiguration)
        let save = UITabBarItem(title: "Save and Exit", image: saveImage,selectedImage: saveImage)
        save.tag = 0
        tabbar.setItems([save], animated: false)
        return tabbar
    }()
    //MARK: - Table UI Object
    private let bookNotesTableView:UITableView = {
        let tableView = UITableView()

--- Page 308 ---
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tableView.backgroundColor = .white
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = true
        return tableView
    }()
Initial LoadingWe are going to use the default viewDidLoad function to set up the view Controller and afunction bookNotesQuery to query the Booknote table to display all available book notes forthe book. Table 16-6 has the relevant code details.
Table 16-6Lifecycle and Setup Functions
//MARK: - Lifecycle Events
    /*
     Leveraging the default viewDidLoad methos to initiate a custom functionsetup to perform initial setup and a bookNotesQuery function to query allthe available book notes for the book
     */
    override func viewDidLoad() {
        super.viewDidLoad()
        setup()
        bookNotesQuery()
    }
    /*
    The setup function does the following:
     - set the background color of the view to white
     - set the tab bar delegate
     - set the book notes table view. The book note table view uses a customcell NotesTableViewCell
    */
    func setup(){
        view.backgroundColor = .white
        tabBar.delegate = self
        bookNotesTableView.delegate = self
        bookNotesTableView.dataSource = self
        bookNotesTableView.register(NotesTableViewCell.self,forCellReuseIdentifier: "note")
        bookNotesTableView.layer.borderWidth = 0
        bookNotesTableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.white.cgColor

--- Page 309 ---
        bookNotesTableView.separatorStyle = .none
    }
    /*
     The bookNotesQuery queries the repository for all available booknotes forthe current book. Once the query completes it stores all the booknotes in alocal variable "booknotes" and draws the screen
     */
    fileprivate func bookNotesQuery(){
        self.databaseFunctions.booknotes.removeAll()
        databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        databaseFunctions.bookNotesQuery(book: book)
        databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            self.booknotes = self.databaseFunctions.booknotes
            self.drawScreen()
        }
    }
The Setup function sets the background color to white. Set delegates for Tab Bar and the Book Notes TableView. Please note we are using a custom cell NotesTableViewCell for displaying the notes.The query function queries the Book Notes Table and once the query is completed, it stores all book notesin a local booknotes variable of type Booknote class and draws the screen with the UI Object.

--- Page 310 ---
Custom Table View Cell for Book NotesNotes Table View Cell has a notes button to display the notes. It is designed to display the noteswith a particular font, size, and style. Create a new class named “NotesTableViewCell” of typeUI Table View Cell and add the code shown in Table 16-7.
Table 16-7Custom Cell Definition
/*
This is a Custom cell class for displaying the Book Notes on the screen.
*/
import UIKit
class NotesTableViewCell: UITableViewCell {
    /*
    Variable to access the CommonFunctions class to draw the UI Object in cell
    */
    let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
    //MARK: - All Display View Items
    /*
     An UI Button defined which will be drawn in the cell
    */
    let notesLabelButton:UIButton = {
        let button = UIButton()
        button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        button.contentEdgeInsets = UIEdgeInsets(top: 0, left: 5, bottom: 2,right: 0)
        button.contentHorizontalAlignment = .left
        button.contentVerticalAlignment = .center
        button.setTitleColor(.black, for: .normal)
        button.titleLabel?.font =  UIFont(name: "Helvetica", size: 14)
        button.clipsToBounds = true
        button.layer.borderColor = UIColor.lightGray.cgColor
        button.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        button.layer.borderWidth = 1
        button.titleLabel?.numberOfLines = 4
        return button
    }()
      override func awakeFromNib() {
          super.awakeFromNib()
      }

--- Page 311 ---
    /*
    This function is called every time the table cell is drawn. The functiondraws the custom UI Button in the cell
    */
    override func setSelected(_ selected: Bool, animated: Bool) {
      super.setSelected(selected, animated: animated)
    contentView.addSubview(notesLabelButton)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: notesLabelButton,constraintField: contentView, topAnchor: 2, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor: -5,heightAnchor: 80)
    }
}
Draw the Notes ScreenReopen “BookNotesViewController” class and add the code shown in Table 16-8. The notesscreen has a table view to add/display notes and a tab bar to dismiss the notes screen andreturn to the book detail view.
Table 16-8Draw Book Notes Display Screen
//MARK: - Draw Screen
    /*
     This function draws the Book Notes screen. If Book notes are avaiable itwill display the same. The First row is always Add Notes
     */
    func drawScreen(){
        let screensize: CGRect = UIScreen.main.bounds
        let screenHeight = screensize.height
        view.addSubview(bookNotesTableView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookNotesTableView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 50, leftAnchor: 5, rightAnchor: -5,heightAnchor: screenHeight - 100)
        view.addSubview(tabBar)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: tabBar, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: screenHeight - 80, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 60)
        tabBar.unselectedItemTintColor = .blue
    }

--- Page 312 ---
Figure 16-2Book Notes Display Screen
Table View FunctionTo display the Book Notes, we will use a table view. We will use the following Table functions:
Number of Rows - Total rows we have in book notes database for the current book.Display the Book Notes – This function will display all the book notes, the first in the tableallows user to add a note.The height of the Table – we have set it to 85 pixels as the notes can have multiple lines.Header Section – To display the book name as a label.The Height of the header – set to default 40 pixels.Trailing Swap function – This will display a delete option for the note upon the right swap onan individual note.Table 16-9 has all the Table-related function code for displaying the book notes of the selectedbook.
Table 16-9Tableview Code for Displaying Book Notes
//MARK: - Table Functions
    /*

--- Page 313 ---
     numberOfRowsInSection will let the table know how many rows are in eachsection.
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section:Int) -> Int {
        return self.booknotes.count
    }
    /*
     cellForRowAt will display the records. The First row is Add Notes optionand it gets a Blue text color to make it stand out.
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
        let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "note", for:indexPath) as! NotesTableViewCell
        cell.notesLabelButton.addTarget(self, action:#selector(iconButtonAction), for: .touchUpInside)
        if(indexPath.row == 0){
            cell.notesLabelButton.setTitleColor(.blue, for: .normal)
            cell.notesLabelButton.layer.borderWidth = 0
        }else{
            cell.notesLabelButton.setTitleColor(.black, for: .normal)
            cell.notesLabelButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
        }
        cell.notesLabelButton.setTitle(self.booknotes[indexPath.row].notes, for:.normal)
        cell.notesLabelButton.tag = indexPath.row
        cell.notesLabelButton.accessibilityIdentifier =String(indexPath.section)
        return cell
    }
    /*
     The height of the each row is set to 85 pixel
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForRowAt indexPath:IndexPath) -> CGFloat {
        return 85.0
    }
    /*
     The viewForHeaderInSection will show the Header with the Title "Notes for

--- Page 314 ---
the Book: <Book Name> "
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, viewForHeaderInSection section:Int) -> UIView? {
        let headerView = UIView.init(frame: CGRect.init(x: 0, y: 0, width:tableView.frame.width, height: 50))
        headerView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 245/255, green: 245/255,blue: 245/255, alpha: 1)
        let label = UILabel()
        label.frame = CGRect.init(x: 15, y: 0, width: headerView.frame.width-10,height: headerView.frame.height-10)
        label.text = "Notes for the Book: " + self.book.bookname
        label.textColor = .black
        label.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 16)
        headerView.addSubview(label)
        return headerView
    }
    /*
     The height of the each header section is set to the default 40 pixel
     */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForHeaderInSection section:Int) -> CGFloat {
        return 40.0
    }
    /*
     The trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt will display a Trash iconupon left swipe, which will allow to delete an individual book note
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {
            let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style: .destructive, title:"Delete", handler: { (action, view, success) in
                let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Delete Alert",message: "Are you Sure You want to Delete?", preferredStyle: .alert)
                // Create the actions
                let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
                        UIAlertAction in
                    self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()

--- Page 315 ---
                    self.databaseFunctions.deleteBookNote(notetoDelete:self.booknotes[indexPath.row].notes,bookname:self.booknotes[indexPath.row].bookname)
                    self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
                        self.booknotes.remove(at: indexPath.row)
                        self.bookNotesTableView.reloadData()
                    }
                }
                let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
                        UIAlertAction in
                    self.bookNotesTableView.reloadData()
                }
                // Add the actions
                alertController.addAction(cancelAction)
                alertController.addAction(okAction)
                // Present the controller
                self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
            })
            deleteAction.backgroundColor = .red
            deleteAction.image = UIImage(systemName: "trash")
            return UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions: [deleteAction])
    }
This part we have learned before. If you need to revisit this section, please refer to previous table viewdefinitions.Please note the first row of the Book Notes will be displayed as an “Add Note” button. This will provideusers with an option to add a note to the Book. To enable the “Add Note” to popup a view to add a note, weare adding a method on the Touch Up Inside event called “iconButtonAction”. Refer the preceding lines ofcode for the implementation details.
Table View Trailing Swipe ControlCode in Table 16-10 implements the Trailing Swipe on Table Cell to show the delete note option.
Table 16-10Tableview Trailing Swipe – Book Notes Delete
/*
     The trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt will display a Trash icon upowill allow to delete an individual book note
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationFoIndexPath) -> UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {

--- Page 316 ---
            let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style: .destructive, title: "Deleteview, success) in
                let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Delete Alert", message: want to Delete?", preferredStyle: .alert)
                // Create the actions
                let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: UIAlertAction.Style.de
                        UIAlertAction in
                    self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
                    self.databaseFunctions.deleteBookNote(notetoDelete:self.booknotes[indexPath.row].notes,bookname: self.booknotes[indexPath.row].b
                    self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
                        self.booknotes.remove(at: indexPath.row)
                        self.bookNotesTableView.reloadData()
                    }
                }
                let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style: UIAlertAction.S
                        UIAlertAction in
                    self.bookNotesTableView.reloadData()
                }
                // Add the actions
                alertController.addAction(cancelAction)
                alertController.addAction(okAction)
                // Present the controller
                self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
            })
            deleteAction.backgroundColor = .red
            deleteAction.image = UIImage(systemName: "trash")
            return UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions: [deleteAction])
    }
    1.  func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationIndexPath) -> UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {
This is the system-defined table view function that allows swipe gestures on table cells. Upon swipe, the tableusers to act. In this case, we will show a delete note option.
    2.  let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style: .destructive, title: "Delete"view, success) in
For our Book Note swipe, we are defining a delete action – giving it a title and a style (destructive means if wewill be performed)    3.  let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Delete Alert", message: "Ato Delete?", preferredStyle: .alert)
    4.  // Create the actions

--- Page 317 ---
    5.  let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: UIAlertAction.Style.defau
    6.  UIAlertAction in
    7.  self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
    8.  self.databaseFunctions.deleteBookNote(notetoDelete:self.booknotes[indexPatself.booknotes[indexPath.row].bookname)
    9.  self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
    10.  self.booknotes.remove(at: indexPath.row)
    11.  self.bookNotesTableView.reloadData()
When the user performs the delete action by swiping on a book note, an alert is shown to confirm deletion, ana DatabaseFunctions method deleteBookNote is called to perform the delete note action (details on the methsection)    12.  }
    13.  }
    14.  let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style: UIAlertAction.St
    15.  UIAlertAction in
    16.  self.bookNotesTableView.reloadData()
If user decided not to delete, it refreshes the table and closes the alert.    17.  }
    18.  // Add the actions
    19.  alertController.addAction(cancelAction)
    20.  alertController.addAction(okAction)
    21.  // Present the controller
    22.  self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
Adding the OK and CANCEL buttons to the alert Controller. The alert Controller is then presented using the sy    23.  })
    24.  deleteAction.backgroundColor = .red
    25.  deleteAction.image = UIImage(systemName: "trash")
    26.  return UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions: [deleteAction])
Upon swipe we can show the option as text or icon – in our code we are showing the option as an icon – we arTrash Icon with a red background color    27.  }
Delete NotesThis is a database function method used for deleting the note. Add the method shown in Table16-11 to the DatabaseFunctions class.
Table 16-11Delete Book Note Code
// MARK: - Delete Book Notes
    /*

--- Page 318 ---
     deleteBookNotes function deletes all booknotes of a book
    */
    func deleteBookNotes(bookname:String){
        var taskRecords = [CKRecord.ID]()
        let pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname = %@",bookname)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Booknotes", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
        operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
            taskRecords.append(record.recordID)
        }
        operation.queryCompletionBlock = { (cursor, error) in
        DispatchQueue.main.async {
            let modifyRecordsOperation =CKModifyRecordsOperation.init(recordsToSave: nil, recordIDsToDelete:taskRecords)
            modifyRecordsOperation.modifyRecordsCompletionBlock = { records,recordIDs, error in  DispatchQueue.main.async {
               if let error = error {
                   print(error)
               }else{
                   self.syncQueue.async {
                        self.group.leave()
                   }
               }
            }}
            CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(modifyRecordsOperation)
        }}
    }
We have learned how to delete a record from an iCloud table before. Please refer to the previous section forthe same. Please note the table is Booknotes (which stores all book notes) and we are only deleting thebook note on which delete swipe action was performed.
Adding NotesWhen user clicks the “Add Note” option, the event shown in Table 16-12 is triggered.
Table 16-12Add Note Custom Function

--- Page 319 ---
/*
     When Add Notes is clicked (the first row) it will will draw the BookNotes Input Screeen
     */
    @objc func iconButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        if(sender.tag == 0){
            drawAddNotes()
        }
    }
In the uitableview CellforRowAt function for the BooknotesTableView, we stored the current rownumber to the button Tag variable. This way when the user clicks on the “Add Note” Button the button tagwill always have the value 0. This is because “Add Note” will always be the first option displayed on thetable. The iconButtonAction is called when the user clicks on the “Add Note” button. In the body of themethod, we are checking if the button tag value is 0 (first row), and if it is 0 then we execute“drawAddNotes” to display the Add Notes popup.
Draw the Add Notes PopupThe Code in Table 16-13 will display the Book Note popup screen.
Table 16-13Add Note Popup Screen
/*
     When Add Notes option is selected the Book Notes input screen is drawnusing the drawAddNotes function
     */
    private func drawAddNotes(){
        let screensize: CGRect = UIScreen.main.bounds
        let screenHeight = screensize.height
        view.addSubview(largerPopUpView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: largerPopUpView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 0, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: screenHeight)
        largerPopUpView.backgroundColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 50, green: 50,blue: 50, alpha: 0.7)
        largerPopUpView.addSubview(popUpView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: popUpView, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 100, leftAnchor: 20, rightAnchor: -20, heightAnchor: 350)
        popUpView.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(roundedRect: CGRect(x: -10, y:-10, width: 370, height: 370), cornerRadius: 12).cgPath
        popUpView.layer.shadowRadius = 2
        popUpView.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        popUpView.layer.shadowOpacity = 0.8

--- Page 320 ---
        popUpView.layer.shadowColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        popUpView.layer.shouldRasterize = true
        view.addSubview(createNotesNavigationBar)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: createNotesNavigationBar,constraintField: popUpView, topAnchor: 0, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 20)
        view.addSubview(bookTextView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: bookTextView, constraintField:createNotesNavigationBar, topAnchor: 50, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor: -2,heightAnchor: 290)
        bookTextView.becomeFirstResponder()
    }
The screen will have a navigation bar and a text view. Navigation bar provides two buttons: one to save thebook note, and the other button will allow the user to close the popup view. The Text view will be used totake book notes input from the user.
Figure 16-3Book Notes Add Notes Screen
Add Notes Navigation Bar Function

--- Page 321 ---
There are two buttons on the Add Notes Navigation Bar: one to Save the Note and other to closethe popup screen. Both these methods are attached to the buttons in the Navigation Bar UIObject definition. The relevant code is in Table 16-14.
Table 16-14Tab Bar Button Functions
/*
     The Navigation bar cancel button will remove the Add book notes screen
     */
    @objc func notesCancelButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        self.bookTextView.text = ""
        removeAddNotesPopUpConstraints()
    }
    /*
     The navigation bar save button to save the book note
     */
    @objc func notesSaveActionButton(sender: UIButton){
        saveNotes()
    }
When the cancel button is selected, we remove all UI Objects from the popup screen. As the book note canbe displayed again, it is a good practice to remove all UI Objects to avoid any constraint conflicts whiledrawing the UI Objects.If Save action is selected, we will call the custom Save Notes method to save the note to iCloud repository.
Remove ConstraintsThe code in Table 16-15 provides the detail on removing the Book Notes screen when usersclose the popup book notes screen.
Table 16-15Remove Constraints
/*
     Remove all Add book notes screen object when user closes the window
     */
    func removeAddNotesPopUpConstraints(){
        largerPopUpView.removeConstraints(largerPopUpView.constraints)
        largerPopUpView.removeFromSuperview()
        popUpView.removeConstraints(popUpView.constraints)
        popUpView.removeFromSuperview()
        createNotesNavigationBar.removeConstraints(createNotesNavigationBar.constr
        createNotesNavigationBar.removeFromSuperview()
        bookTextView.removeConstraints(bookTextView.constraints)
        bookTextView.removeFromSuperview()

--- Page 322 ---
    }
Function to remove all the popup view UI Objects so that we can revert to the main display.

--- Page 323 ---
Save Book MethodThe code shown in Table 16-16 will invoke the save method to store the book notes into theiCloud repository.
Table 16-16Save Book Notes Validation
/*
     Saiving the book note to the repository
     */
    func saveNotes(){
        if(bookTextView.text == ""){
            bookTextView.text = ""
            let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Save Alert", message:"No Notes to Save", preferredStyle: .alert)
            // Create the actions
            let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
                    UIAlertAction in
                self.tabBarController?.selectedIndex = 0
            }
            // Add the actions
            alertController.addAction(okAction)
            // Present the controller
            self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
            bookTextView.becomeFirstResponder()
        }
        else{
            self.databaseFunctions.booknote.bookname = book.bookname
            self.databaseFunctions.booknote.authorname = book.authorname
            self.databaseFunctions.booknote.notes = bookTextView.text
            self.databaseFunctions.booknote.bookid = book.recordID
            self.booknotes.append(self.databaseFunctions.booknote)
            self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
            self.databaseFunctions.saveBookNotes()
            self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
                self.removeAddNotesPopUpConstraints()
                self.bookTextView.text = ""
                self.bookNotesTableView.reloadData()
            }

--- Page 324 ---
        }
    }
This function will save notes after doing all validation to the “Booknotes” Record type in the iClouddatabase repository.
Database Save Book MethodOpen the DatabaseFunctions class and add the method as shown in Table 16-17.
Table 16-17Save Book Notes in iCloud Repository
//MARK: - Save BooK Notes Record
    /*
     saveBookNotes saves a booknotes for a book to the iCloud repository
    */
    func saveBookNotes(){
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        // Save the zone in the private database
        let container = CKContainer.default()
        let privateDB = container.privateCloudDatabase
        privateDB.save(ckRecordZoneID){ zone, error in
          if let error = error{
            print("Zone creation error: \(String(describing: error))")
          }else{
            print("Zone created: \(zone!)")
          }
        }
        let privateDatabase = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
        print(ckRecordZoneID.zoneID)
        let ckRecordID = CKRecord.ID(zoneID: ckRecordZoneID.zoneID)
        let aRecord = CKRecord(recordType: "Booknotes", recordID: ckRecordID)
        aRecord["bookname"] = booknote.bookname
        aRecord["authorname"] = booknote.authorname
        aRecord["booknotes"] = booknote.notes
        let bookReference = CKRecord.Reference(recordID: booknote.bookid,action: .deleteSelf)
        aRecord["bookid"] = bookReference
        aRecord.setParent(booknote.bookid)
        privateDatabase.save(aRecord, completionHandler: { (record, error) ->Void in
            DispatchQueue.main.async {

--- Page 325 ---
                if let error = error {
                    print(error)
                }
                else{
                    self.syncQueue.async {
                        self.group.leave()
                    }
                }
                }
        })
    }
Tab Bar FunctionThis function will be closed when the user clicks on the tab bar cancel button. The body of thefunction has a dismiss function to close the Book Notes View and return to the Book Detail View.The code in Table 16-18 provides the relevant details.
Table 16-18Tab Bar Dismiss Function
    //MARK: - Tab Bar Function
    /*
     Dismissing the Book Notes screen and return to the Book Details screen
     */
    func tabBar(_ tabBar: UITabBar, didSelect item: UITabBarItem) {
        dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
    }
SummaryIn this chapter, we learned how to set up parent child records in the iCloud database. One bookcan have many notes. We learned how to Add notes, delete notes, cascading delete all book noteswhen a book is deleted.Next chapter, we will learn how to set up a Book Reminder.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 326 ---
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_17

--- Page 327 ---
(1)
17. Book Reminder
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
Think of a scenario, you are putting together a list of books you want to read on your nextvacation, and now that you have a list of books you want to read, you now want to set areminder on the day of your vacation so that you can carry the book and eventually read it.When we set a reminder for a book, it will show on the iPhone notification center as shownin Figure 17-2. Please note that for accessing the notification, the user must give permission tothe App to show the notification as shown in Figure 17-1.Following is the progress made so far on Book Detail Screen:
Share Book Record - CompleteEdit Book Record - In ProgressDelete Book RecordBook NotesSetting Book ReminderMarking Book as Favorite

--- Page 328 ---
Figure 17-1Permission Request
Figure 17-2Notification Screen
Reminder Action Button

--- Page 329 ---
The Reminder block has a Touch Up Inside event attached to the function“reminderButtonAction”, as shown in Table 17-1.
Table 17-1Reminder Button Action Function
/*
     When the user clicks on the Share Button the following function will betriggered. It will do the following:
     - give the block a bouncing effect
     - call the functions drawReminderPopupScreen which will draw the Reminderscreen to set Reminder for the book
     */
    @objc func reminderButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        animation(sender: sender)
        drawReminderPopupScreen()
    }
1. @objc func reminderButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
This is the Touch Up Inside event for the Reminder Button.2. animation(sender: sender)
Animation will help to show a bounce effect. We will learn about it later.3. drawReminderPopupScreen()
This is to draw the popup screen for setting the Reminder4. }
Draw Reminder ScreenThis is a popup screen to allow the user to set the reminder. Following UI Objects are drawn onthe screen(refer to Table 17-2 for Code details):
A large popup view to cover the Book Detail ScreenA popup view to show the reminder UI objectsA Date and time scroll for user to set a date and a time when the reminder should appear forthe bookTwo image views. The first one will save the reminder to the iCloud repository and the secondimage view will reset the reminder to a back date. Image view does not have thetouchUpInside event. To enable the click event, we need to define it as a tap gesture event.
Table 17-2Draw Reminder Popup Screen
/MARK: - Reminder Screen
    /*
     The Reminder Pop up screen is drawn using this function
     */
    func drawReminderPopupScreen(){

--- Page 330 ---
        let screensize: CGRect = UIScreen.main.bounds
        let screenHeight = screensize.height
        view.addSubview(largerPopUpView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: largerPopUpView,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 0, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: screenHeight)
        largerPopUpView.backgroundColor = UIColor(displayP3Red: 50, green: 50,blue: 50, alpha: 0.7)
        largerPopUpView.addSubview(popUpView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: popUpView, constraintField:view!, topAnchor: 300, leftAnchor: 40, rightAnchor: -40, heightAnchor: 200)
        popUpView.layer.shadowPath = UIBezierPath(roundedRect: CGRect(x: -10, y:-10, width: 330, height: 220), cornerRadius: 12).cgPath
        popUpView.layer.shadowRadius = 2
        popUpView.layer.shadowOffset = .zero
        popUpView.layer.shadowOpacity = 0.8
        popUpView.layer.shadowColor = UIColor.gray.cgColor
        popUpView.layer.shouldRasterize = true
        popUpView.addSubview(reminderLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: reminderLabel,constraintField: popUpView, topAnchor: 10, leftAnchor: 2, rightAnchor: -2,heightAnchor: 40)
        reminderLabel.text = "Set Reminder for Book \"\(book.bookname.capitalized)\""
        reminderLabel.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 16)
        popUpView.addSubview(reminderdatePicker)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: reminderdatePicker,constraintField: popUpView, topAnchor: 80, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: -40,heightAnchor: 40)
        if(book.reminder != nil){
            reminderdatePicker.date = book.reminder
        }
        popUpView.addSubview(reminderPopUpImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: reminderPopUpImageView,constraintField: popUpView, topAnchor: 140, leftAnchor: 100, rightAnchor:-160, heightAnchor: 40)
        popUpView.addSubview(reminderResetImageView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: reminderResetImageView,constraintField: popUpView, topAnchor: 140, leftAnchor: 170, rightAnchor:-90, heightAnchor: 40)
    }

--- Page 331 ---
Figure 17-3Reminder Popup Screen
Save ReminderAs Image View doesn’t have any default event defined, we need to add a tap gesture (see setupsection to understand how to define tap gesture).The function does the following:
Calls a method to add notification to the notification center.Update the Book class object reminder attribute with the reminder date.Remove the pop screen UI Objects.Update the database with new reminder date.Table 17-3 has the relevant code details for the tap gesture response on image view.
Table 17-3Image View Tap Gestures
/*
     reminderImageTapped is called when the user selects the Set Reminderbutton. It calls the addNotification function to add the book reminder tothe iOS Notification center. Also, set the reminder date to the bookReminder variable. It removes the screen and calls the updateBookReminderto update the reminder for the book in the iCloud repository
    */

--- Page 332 ---
    @objc func reminderImageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:UITapGestureRecognizer){
        self.addNotification(title: book.bookname, reminderDate:reminderdatePicker.date)
        book.reminder = reminderdatePicker.date
        removeReminderContraints()
        self.updateBookReminder()
    }
Setup ReminderThis method sets the notification center with the book name that needs to be reminded of theset date and time. Table 17-4 has the relevant code details.
Table 17-4Notification Setup Code
//MARK: - Notification Section
    /*
     The below function will add Notification to the iOS notification console.
    */
    func addNotification(title: String, reminderDate: Date) {
        let center = UNUserNotificationCenter.current()
        let addRequest = {
            let content = UNMutableNotificationContent()
            content.title = title.capitalized
            content.subtitle = "\(title.capitalized) Book Reminder"
            content.sound = UNNotificationSound.default
            let calendar = Calendar.current
            var components = calendar.dateComponents([.year], from: reminderDate)
            let year = components.year
            components = calendar.dateComponents([.month], from: reminderDate)
            let month = components.month
            components = calendar.dateComponents([.day], from: reminderDate)
            let day = components.day
            components = calendar.dateComponents([.hour], from: reminderDate)
            let hour = components.hour
            components = calendar.dateComponents([.minute], from: reminderDate)
            let minute = components.minute
            var dateComponents = DateComponents()
            dateComponents.hour = hour

--- Page 333 ---
            dateComponents.minute = minute
            dateComponents.year = year
            dateComponents.month = month
            dateComponents.day = day
            let trigger = UNCalendarNotificationTrigger(dateMatching:dateComponents, repeats: false)
            let request = UNNotificationRequest(identifier: UUID().uuidString,content: content, trigger: trigger)
            center.add(request)
        }
        center.getNotificationSettings { settings in
            if settings.authorizationStatus == .authorized {
                addRequest()
            } else {
                center.requestAuthorization(options: [.alert, .badge, .sound]) {success, error in
                    if success {
                        addRequest()
                    } else {
                        print("Error is \(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No error Code")")
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
    1. func addNotification(title: String, reminderDate: Date) {
This is a custom function called every time the reminder is set    2. let center = UNUserNotificationCenter.current()
We will get the User Notification center handle in a local variable.    3. let addRequest = {
    4. let content = UNMutableNotificationContent()
    5. content.title = title.capitalized
    6. content.subtitle = "\(title.capitalized) Book Reminder"
    7. content.sound = UNNotificationSound.default
    8. let calendar = Calendar.current
    9. var components = calendar.dateComponents([.year], from: reminderDate)
    10. let year = components.year
    11. components = calendar.dateComponents([.month], from: reminderDate)

--- Page 334 ---
    12. let month = components.month
    13. components = calendar.dateComponents([.day], from: reminderDate)
    14. let day = components.day
    15. components = calendar.dateComponents([.hour], from: reminderDate)
    16. let hour = components.hour
    17. components = calendar.dateComponents([.minute], from: reminderDate)
    18. let minute = components.minute
    19. var dateComponents = DateComponents()
    20. dateComponents.hour = hour
    21. dateComponents.minute = minute
    22. dateComponents.year = year
    23. dateComponents.month = month
    24. dateComponents.day = day
    25. let trigger = UNCalendarNotificationTrigger(dateMatching:dateComponents, repeats: false)
    26. //let trigger = UNTimeIntervalNotificationTrigger(timeInterval: 5,repeats: false)
    27. let request = UNNotificationRequest(identifier: UUID().uuidString,content: content, trigger: trigger)
    28. center.add(request)
    29. }
The preceding code creates a notification with the title as the book name for his reminder needs to be set,informs the notification center on the date and time when reminder needs to be displayed, creates thenotification trigger, adds the trigger to a notification request, and finally adds it to the notification center.    30. center.getNotificationSettings { settings in
    31. if settings.authorizationStatus == .authorized {
    32. addRequest()
    33. } else {
    34. center.requestAuthorization(options: [.alert, .badge, .sound]) {success, error in
    35. if success {
    36. addRequest()
    37. } else {
    38. print("Error is \(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No error Code")")
    39. }
    40. }
    41. }
Line 44–55 checks whether the user has access to the notification center. For the first time, a notificationdisplay confirmation popup will be shown. If the user agrees, it will inform the Notification Center thatfuture notifications can be displayed.

--- Page 335 ---
    42. }
    43. }
Reset ReminderAs Imageview does not have any event attached to it, we need to add a tap gesture (see setupsection to understand how to define tap gesture).The function removed all UI Objects from the reminder popup screen, as shown in Table 17-5.
Table 17-5Set Reminder Tap Gesture
/*
     reminderResetImageTapped will reset the date to a back date and set thebook reminder variabel to the same.
     */
    @objc func reminderResetImageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:UITapGestureRecognizer){
        var calendar = Calendar.current
        calendar.timeZone = NSTimeZone.local
        book.reminder =  calendar.date(byAdding: .day, value: -5, to: Date())
        reminderdatePicker.date =  calendar.date(byAdding: .day, value: -5, to:Date())!
    }
    1. @objc func reminderResetImageTapped(tapGestureRecognizer:UITapGestureRecognizer){
This method is defined for the ImageView Reset image    2. var calendar = Calendar.current
    3. calendar.timeZone = NSTimeZone.local
    4. book.reminder = calendar.date(byAdding: .day, value: -5, to: Date())
    5. reminderdatePicker.date = calendar.date(byAdding: .day, value: -5, to:Date())!
Lines 2–5 we are getting access to the calendar. Getting the user's current local time zone. The reminder isset to a back date, five days before the current date. This way notification will be void.    6. }
Update ReminderThe method defined in Table 17-6 calls the DatabaseFunctions Update Reminder Method tosave the reminder data in Book Record Type. After saving, it removes all UI Objects of theReminder Popup screen.
Table 17-6Reminder Update Function

--- Page 336 ---
/*
     function to update the Book Repository with the updated reminder value
     */
    func updateBookReminder(){
        self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        self.databaseFunctions.updateBookReminder(orginalBook: book)
        self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            self.removeReminderContraints()
        }
    }
Update Database with Reminder DateOpen the “DatabaseFunctions” class and add the method defined in Table 17-7. This methodupdates the book Record type for the selected book with the updated reminder date.
Table 17-7Update Reminder iCloud Repository
//MARK: -  Update Reminder - Private Database
    /*
    When reminder is set updateBookReminder updates the book record with thereminder date
    */
    func updateBookReminder(orginalBook: Book){
        let pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname == %@ && authorname ==%@",orginalBook.bookname, orginalBook.authorname)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        let sharedDatabase = CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
           CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
           operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
               record["reminder"] = orginalBook.reminder
               sharedDatabase.save(record, completionHandler: { (record, error) ->Void in
                   DispatchQueue.main.async {
                       if let error = error {
                           print(error)
                       }
                       else {

--- Page 337 ---
                           self.syncQueue.async {
                               let book = Book()
                               book.bookname = record!.object(forKey: "bookname")! as? String
                               book.authorname = record!.object(forKey: "authorname")! as?String
                               book.genre =  record!.object(forKey: "genre")! as? String
                               book.status = record!.object(forKey: "status")! as? String
                               self.book = book
                               self.group.leave()
                           }
                       }
                   }
               })
           }
    }
Remove Reminder ScreenThis function, as shown in Table 17-8, removes all UI Objects of the reminder Popup screen.
Table 17-8Remove Reminder Constraint
//MARK: - Remove Constraints
    /*
    Removing the Reminder Popup view
    */
    func removeReminderContraints(){
        largerPopUpView.removeConstraints(largerPopUpView.constraints)
        largerPopUpView.removeFromSuperview()
        popUpView.removeConstraints(popUpView.constraints)
        popUpView.removeFromSuperview()
        reminderLabel.removeConstraints(reminderLabel.constraints)
        reminderLabel.removeFromSuperview()
        reminderdatePicker.removeConstraints(reminderdatePicker.constraints)
        reminderdatePicker.removeFromSuperview()
        reminderPopUpImageView.removeConstraints(reminderPopUpImageView.constraint
        reminderPopUpImageView.removeFromSuperview()
    }

--- Page 338 ---
SummaryIn this chapter, we learned how to use the default iOS Notification center to pop up reminders onbooks (example, you want to set a reminder to read a book) on a particular date and time.The next chapter will conclude the Book Detail screen. We will learn how to make a BookFavorite.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 339 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of SpringerNature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_18
18. Mark Favorite
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
In the main display screen, we have a section dedicated to Favorite books.Any book that is marked as favorite is shown in that section, regardless of theBook Status (Read/Reading/To be Read).

--- Page 340 ---
Figure 18-1 Favorite Screen
Following is the progress made so far on Book Detail Screen:
Share Book Record - CompleteEdit Book Record - In ProgressDelete Book RecordBook NotesSetting Book ReminderMarking Book as Favorite

--- Page 341 ---
Frequency Button Action
The Frequency Display block button has a method attached for thetouchUpInside event. It is a toggle switch – if a favorite is marked, the colorof the favorite block is set to gray. Also, the book database table is updated toindicate that the book is marked as favorite. The code in Table 18-1 has therelevant code details.
Table 18-1 Frequency Button Action Function
//MARK: - Favorite Section
    /*
     frequencyButtonAction is called when Frequency button is
clicked. It toogles the favorite status and saves the status
in the iCloud repository
     */
    @objc func frequencyButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        if(book.favorite == 0){
            book.favorite = 1
            favButton.backgroundColor = .lightGray
            favTextLabel.backgroundColor = .lightGray
        }else{
            book.favorite = 0
            favButton.backgroundColor = .white
            favTextLabel.backgroundColor = .white
        }
        self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        self.databaseFunctions.updateBookFavorite(orginalBook:
book)
        self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Favorite
Alert", message: "Book '\(self.book.bookname!)' is Saved",
preferredStyle: .alert)
            // Create the actions

--- Page 342 ---
            let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:
UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
                    UIAlertAction in
                self.tabBarController?.selectedIndex = 0
            }
            // Add the actions
            alertController.addAction(okAction)
            // Present the controller
            self.present(alertController, animated: true,
completion: nil)
        }
    }
    1. @objc func frequencyButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
This is the custom-defined function linked to the Touch Up Inside event.
    2. if(book.favorite == 0){
    3. book.favorite = 1
    4. favButton.backgroundColor = .lightGray
    5. favTextLabel.backgroundColor = .lightGray
    6. }else{
    7. book.favorite = 0
    8. favButton.backgroundColor = .white
    9. favTextLabel.backgroundColor = .white
    10. }
In the Book Record Type for the field favorite, we store 1 for book marked asfavorite, otherwise the field will store 0. Line 8–16 is checking for the favorite statusand making the background gray if it is marked as a favorite book, otherwise thebackground color is set to white.
    11. self.databaseFunctions.group.enter()
    12. self.databaseFunctions.updateBookFavorite(orginalBook:
book)
    13. self.databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {

--- Page 343 ---
    14. let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Favorite
Alert", message: "Book '\(self.book.bookname!)' is Saved",
preferredStyle: .alert)
    15. // Create the actions
    16. let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style:
UIAlertAction.Style.default) {
    17. UIAlertAction in
    18. self.tabBarController?.selectedIndex = 0
    19. }
The Database Function updateBookFavorite is called to save the Favorite status.After saving it, the user is shown an alert indicating that the book is marked asfavorite.
    20. // Add the actions
    21. alertController.addAction(okAction)
    22. // Present the controller
    23. self.present(alertController, animated: true, completion:
nil)
Line 26–29 is presenting the alert on the screen
    24. }
    25. }
Database Functions Update Favorite Status
Open the “DatabaseFunctions” class and add the function defined in Table18-2 to update the book record favorite field with user-defined value.
Table 18-2 Update Favorite Status
//MARK: -  Update Favorite - Private Database
    /*
    When favorite is set updateBookFavorite updates the book
record with the favorite flag
    */
    func updateBookFavorite(orginalBook: Book){

--- Page 344 ---
        let pred = NSPredicate(format: "bookname == %@ &&
authorname == %@",orginalBook.bookname,
orginalBook.authorname)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        let sharedDatabase =
CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase
           CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
           operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
               record["favorite"] = orginalBook.favorite
               sharedDatabase.save(record, completionHandler: {
(record, error) -> Void in
                   DispatchQueue.main.async {
                       if let error = error {
                           print(error)
                       }
                       else {
                           self.syncQueue.async {
                               let book = Book()
                               book.bookname = record!.object(forKey:
"bookname")! as? String
                               book.authorname = record!.object(forKey:
"authorname")! as? String
                               book.genre =  record!.object(forKey: "genre")! as?
String
                               book.status = record!.object(forKey: "status")!
as? String
                               book.favorite = record!.object(forKey:
"favorite")! as? Int64
                               self.book = book

--- Page 345 ---
                               self.group.leave()
                           }
                       }
                   }
               })
           }
    }
Animation Function
The Animation function helps to give the currently tapped block a bouncingeffect. The code detailed in Table 18-3 has the relevant details.
Table 18-3 Animation Code
//MARK: - Animation
    /*
     Animation takes the UIButton as an input and provides a
bouncing effect for the button using the animate function
     */
    fileprivate func animation(sender: UIButton){
        sender.transform = CGAffineTransform(scaleX: 0.9, y: 0.9)
           UIView.animate(withDuration: 2.0,
                                      delay: 0,
                                      usingSpringWithDamping: CGFloat(0.20),
                                      initialSpringVelocity: CGFloat(6.0),
                                      options:
UIView.AnimationOptions.allowUserInteraction,
                                      animations: {
                                       sender.transform = CGAffineTransform.identity
               },
                                      completion: { Void in()  }
           )

--- Page 346 ---
    }
    1. fileprivate func animation(sender: UIButton){
Custom function to perform the bouncing effect. It takes Button that need to get thebounce affect as an input parameter
    2. sender.transform = CGAffineTransform(scaleX: 0.9, y: 0.9)
every UI object has a transform variable – the CGAffineTransform is used to rotate,scale, or skew the object.
    3. UIView.animate(withDuration: 2.0,
    4. delay: 0,
    5. usingSpringWithDamping: CGFloat(0.20),
    6. initialSpringVelocity: CGFloat(6.0),
    7. options: UIView.AnimationOptions.allowUserInteraction,
    8. animations: {
    9. sender.transform = CGAffineTransform.identity
    10. },
    11. completion: { Void in() }
    12. )
On the UI View, we are invoking the animation function. It takes three parameters –time duration, any delay that we need to define for the animation, and the object toanimate.
    13. }
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to set up a book as Favorite. The booksmarked as Favorite show up in the display screen under the Favorite section,giving easy access to users’ favorite books.This concludes the Book Detail Section of the book. In the next chapter,we will learn how to display the shared books from other users in the SharedTab of the Book Tracker App.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 347 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_19
19. Shared Books Tab
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
Sharing content across users of your application is a powerful feature that iOS offers. As we havelearned before, iOS takes privacy and security of user generated content with extremeseriousness. In our App any content created by the user is by default stored in a privatedatabase, which only the user, who is the owner of the content, has access to. If a user decides toshare his/her content with another group of users, it must be explicitly requested, and uponcompletion of the share the record is then visible to all users at once. iOS stores such records ina Shared Database, and any CRUD function on such records is then visible to all.In our Book Tracker App, users can share a book with other user(s). The Shared books Tabdisplays all books shared by other users. The code written here is the same as our Main BookDisplay and Book Details View Controller except all CRUD functions are executed against aShared Database. There are few additions / Changes that we need to do to make Shared Bookswork. This section captures all those additional details that you have to learn to enable SharedBook functionalities.
Accept the Share Record: Scene DelegateThe request for a share book will come as a text message (as explained in Share Book Record inthe Book Details View Controller Section). When the user clicks on the message, the followingcode will be executedIn the Default Scene Delegate file, add the following function.
internal func windowScene(_ windowScene: UIWindowScene,userDidAcceptCloudKitShareWith cloudKitShareMetadata: CKShare.Metadata) {
        let tabController = self.window?.rootViewController as! UITabBarController
        let vc = tabController.viewControllers
        let viewController = vc?[0] as! BooksViewController
        let acceptSharing: CKAcceptSharesOperation =CKAcceptSharesOperation(shareMetadatas: [cloudKitShareMetadata])
        acceptSharing.qualityOfService = .userInteractive
        acceptSharing.perShareCompletionBlock = {meta, share, error in
            print("successfully shared")
        }
        acceptSharing.acceptSharesCompletionBlock = {

--- Page 348 ---
            error in
            guard (error == nil) else{
                print(error!)
                print("Error XX \(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No Error Code toShow")")
                return
            }
            viewController.fetchShare(cloudKitShareMetadata)
        }
        CKContainer(identifier:cloudKitShareMetadata.containerIdentifier).add(acceptSharing)
    }
    1. internal func windowScene(_ windowScene: UIWindowScene,userDidAcceptCloudKitShareWith cloudKitShareMetadata: CKShare.Metadata) {
This is a system default function which is called when a user accepts the Share record request fromiMessage/WhatsApp or other supported Apps.    2. let tabController = self.window?.rootViewController as!UITabBarController
As Our View is a Tab Controller view, we are getting access to the Tab Controller. This is required becausethe function to execute, accept, share request is in our BooksViewController (note this function can be inany class file).    3. let vc = tabController.viewControllers
The viewControllers attribute of type UITabBarController will give us access to all its view controllers.    4. let viewController = vc?[0] as! BooksViewController
Using the index, we are getting reference to the first View Controller, BooksViewController. This isbecause our custom method to accept the shared record stored is defined in this class.    5. let acceptSharing: CKAcceptSharesOperation =CKAcceptSharesOperation(shareMetadatas: [cloudKitShareMetadata])
CKAcceptSharesOperation has the shared record meta data which we are storing in a local variableacceptSharing    6. acceptSharing.qualityOfService = .userInteractive
    7. acceptSharing.perShareCompletionBlock = {meta, share, error in
    8. print("successfully shared")
    9. }
    10. acceptSharing.acceptSharesCompletionBlock = {
    11. error in
    12. guard (error == nil) else{
    13. print(error!)
    14. print("Error XX \(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No Error Code toShow")")
    15. return

--- Page 349 ---
    16. }
This block simply accepts the record and prints if there are any errors    17. viewController.fetchShare(cloudKitShareMetadata)
If there are no errors in accepting the shared record, in that case we are calling our custom Fetch Sharemethod defined in the BooksViewController. The custom method takes CloudKit shared metadata asinput. This variable will have the reference to the shared record    18. }
    19. CKContainer(identifier:cloudKitShareMetadata.containerIdentifier).add(acceptSharing)
This line of code will inform the CloudKit container that are accepting the shared record. Please note, thiswill only happen when the recipient user accepts the Shared Record.    20. }
Share Record FunctionThe Share Book Function can be in any file. We are currently defining it in theBooksViewController. Open the file and add the following lines of code:
/*
     This function is called when a book share is accepted by a user. We will invthis from Scene Delegate system class. The function will retrieve the sharedrecord and store in User Shared Database in iCloud.
     */
    func fetchShare(_ cloudKitShareMetadata: CKShare.Metadata){
        let op = CKFetchRecordsOperation(recordIDs:[cloudKitShareMetadata.rootRecordID])
        op.perRecordCompletionBlock = { record, _, error in
            guard error == nil, record != nil else{
                print("error \(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No Error")")
                return
            }
            DispatchQueue.main.async {
                self.cloudKitTask = record
                let name = (cloudKitShareMetadata.ownerIdentity.nameComponents?.givenNam"") + " " + (cloudKitShareMetadata.ownerIdentity.nameComponents?.familyName ?
                record?.setValue(name, forKey: "shareuser")
                record?.setValue(Int64(cloudKitShareMetadata.participantPermission.rawVforKey: "sharepremission")
                let alert = UIAlertController(title: "Shared Record Status", message: "Rsuccesfully shared by \(name)", preferredStyle: .alert)
                alert.addAction(UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .default, handler: { in

--- Page 350 ---
                      switch action.style{
                      case .default:
                            print("default")
                      case .cancel:
                            print("cancel")
                      case .destructive:
                            print("destructive")
                      @unknown default:
                        print("error")
                      }}))
                self.present(alert, animated: true, completion: nil)
                //self.querySharedTasks()
                let sharedDatabase = CKContainer.default().sharedCloudDatabase
                sharedDatabase.save(record!, completionHandler: { (record, error) -> Vo
                    DispatchQueue.main.async {
                        if let error = error {
                            print(error)
                        }
                        return
                    }
                })
            }
        }
        CKContainer.default().sharedCloudDatabase.add(op)
    }
    1. func fetchShare(_ cloudKitShareMetadata: CKShare.Metadata){
This is our custom method which will fetch the shared record and store it in the Shared Database. The methoshared MetaData as input.    2. let op = CKFetchRecordsOperation(recordIDs:[cloudKitShareMetadata.rootRecordID])
    3. op.perRecordCompletionBlock = { record, _, error in
    4. guard error == nil, record != nil else{
    5. print("error \(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No Error")")
    6. return
    7. }
    8. DispatchQueue.main.async {
    9. self.cloudKitTask = record

--- Page 351 ---
    10. let name = (cloudKitShareMetadata.ownerIdentity.nameComponents?.givenName "") + " " + (cloudKitShareMetadata.ownerIdentity.nameComponents?.familyName ?
    11. record?.setValue(name, forKey: "shareuser")
    12. record?.setValue(Int64(cloudKitShareMetadata.participantPermission.rawValforKey: "sharepremission")
We are retrieving the record from the shared user repository. Once retrieved, we are storing all relevant attriba locally defined variable called record of type CloudKitTask.    13. let alert = UIAlertController(title: "Shared Record Status", message: "Recsuccessfully shared by \(name)", preferredStyle: .alert)
    14. alert.addAction(UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .default, handler: { acin
    15. switch action.style{
    16. case .default:
    17. print("default")
    18. case .cancel:
    19. print("cancel")
    20. case .destructive:
    21. print("destructive")
    22. @unknown default:
    23. print("error")
    24. }}))
    25. self.present(alert, animated: true, completion: nil)
After retrieving the record successfully, the lines of the preceding code display an alert stating the Book is sha    26. let sharedDatabase = CKContainer.default().sharedCloudDatabase
    27. sharedDatabase.save(record!, completionHandler: { (record, error) -> Void
    28. DispatchQueue.main.async {
    29. if let error = error {
    30. print(error)
    31. }
    32. return
    33. }
    34. })
    35. }
    36. }
    37. CKContainer.default().sharedCloudDatabase.add(op)
The preceding line of code stores the fetched shared record in the Shared Database. This completes the ShareRecord retrieval and storing part. We can now query the Shared Database and display it on our Shared Tab DiView.    38. }

--- Page 352 ---
Shared Book Database FunctionIn this section, we will query the shared database to retrieve all book records which are sharedby other users. There are two distinct differences from what you have learned so far aboutquerying database:
Record Zone: Every shared user record is stored in a unique system-defined record zone.This is done so that the access is restricted to only the required users. Zones provide thatlogical separation to ensure only relevant users have access to the shared records. ForQuerying all shared records by different Book Tracker users, we need to query all availableuser record zones.Shared Database: Until now our queries were against the private database. For shared books,we need to query the shared database instead.
Shared Task ZonesThis is to query all unique record zones for all books shared by other users. OpenDataBaseFunctions class and add the following code.
//MARK: - Get the Zones
    /*
     Before doing any query on Shared Databases we need to retrieve all zonesthat the other users have shared. The sharedTasksZones function retrievesall such zone and stores it in a class level variable sharedRecordZones
    */
      func sharedTasksZones(period: String){
          let sharedData = CKContainer.default().sharedCloudDatabase
          sharedData.fetchAllRecordZones { (recordZone, error) inDispatchQueue.main.async {
              if error != nil {
                  print(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No Error")
                  self.group.leave()
              }
              self.syncQueue.async {
                  if let recordZones = recordZone {
                      self.sharedRecordZones = recordZones
                      if(period == CommonVariables.Query_ALL){
                           self.sharedBookQuery(period: period, recordZone: recordZones,counter: 0)
                      }
                  }
              }
          }}

--- Page 353 ---
      }
    1. func sharedTasksZones(period: String){
This is a custom function which will be called first before querying the table. This function will find allavailable zones.    2. let sharedData = CKContainer.default().sharedCloudDatabase
    3. sharedData.fetchAllRecordZones { (recordZone, error) inDispatchQueue.main.async {
    4. if error != nil {
    5. print(error?.localizedDescription ?? "No Error")
    6. self.group.leave()
    7. }
    8. self.syncQueue.async {
    9. if let recordZones = recordZone {
    10. self.sharedRecordZones = recordZones
    11. if(period == CommonVariables.Query_ALL){
    12. self.sharedBookQuery(period: period, recordZone: recordZones, counter:0)
    13. }
    14. }
    15. }
We are fetching all the record zones and then calling our custom Query Function. Notice, we passed all therecord zones an input parameter.    16. }}
    17. }
Query FunctionsThis function will be called in a loop. In each iteration, we will retrieve the associated recordsfrom the specified record zone.
// MARK: - Retrieve All Shared Books
    /*
     sharedBookQuery function is called on a repeat till all shared zones arequeried for books shared by other users
    */
    func sharedBookQuery(period: String, recordZone: [CKRecordZone], counter:Int) {
        let pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)

--- Page 354 ---
        CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        let sharedData = CKContainer.default().sharedCloudDatabase
        if(recordZone.count != 0){
            sharedData.perform(query, inZoneWith: recordZone[counter].zoneID) {results, error in DispatchQueue.main.async {
                if let error = error {
                    print("Cloud Query Error - Fetch Establishments: \(error)")
                    self.group.leave()
                }else if let books = results {
                    self.syncQueue.async {
                        for task in books{
                            let record = Book()
                            record.bookname = task.object(forKey: "bookname") as? String
                            record.authorname = task.object(forKey: "authorname") as? String
                            record.recordID = task.recordID
                            record.genre = task.object(forKey: "genre") as? String
                            record.status = task.object(forKey: "status") as? String
                            record.reminder = task.object(forKey: "reminder") as? Date
                            record.favorite = task.object(forKey: "favorite") as? Int64
                            self.books.append(record)
                            if(recordZone.count == counter + 1){
                                self.group.leave()
                            }else{
                                self.sharedBookQuery(period: period, recordZone: recordZone,counter: counter + 1)
                            }
                        }
                    }
                }
            }}
        }else{
            self.group.leave()
        }
    }
Please note, we are using a counter to check if all record zones are exhausted; when all zones are over, weleave the asynchronous loop by leaving the group.

--- Page 355 ---
There is no difference in this query from what we have done before, except the following:    • The recordZone input parameter is an array and we use a counter to provide zone ID input toinZoneWith parameter in an iterative manner to perform the query.    • Once the query is performed and controls return to the block, we are only leaving the loop if thecounter (which is incremented by 1) is equal to the total count of the recordZone Array.    • If not, we are calling the same function again, but after incrementing the counter variable by 1.
SummaryIn this chapter, we learned how to accept a shared record and display the records shared byother users on the Shared Tab of the Book Tracker App.In the next chapter, we will learn how to Search a book from the iCloud repository.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 356 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloudhttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_20
20. Search Screen
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
This is the last Display screen we are going to code for our application. Search will allow users tosearch for books using either the book name or the author’s name. All books are stored in aBook Class variable called Books. Based on the search input text provided by the user, we willsearch for books and author names for any partial match. All books that will match the searchcriteria will be stored in a temporary variable. The result is then displayed using a table. Whenthe user taps on a searched book from the list, it will show the Book Detail Screen.
Figure 20-1Search Book Screen

--- Page 357 ---
Create the View ControllerCreate a new View Controller with the name “SearchViewController” and in the MainStoryboard, attach it to the search tab (last one).The Search View Controller inherits Table View Delegate, and Table view Data source toshow the search results in a table, and Text Field Delegate to dismiss the keyboard when usertaps on the return key on the Search Input Screen. The code details are defined in Table 20-1.
Table 20-1Class Inheritance
class SearchViewController: UIViewController, UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource, UITextFieldDelegate {
Class VariablesWe will have three class level variables. A variable to access the common functions class fordrawing the screen, a variable to access DatabaseFunctions class to access the function toquery the database and a variable that will hold the books’ user search results. Table 20-2 hasthe relevant code details.
Table 20-2Class Variables
//MARK: - Class Variables
    /*
     The below two variables are used to access the common class functions andvariables
    */
    let commonFunctions = CommonFunctions()
    let databaseFunctions = DatabaseFunctions()
    /*
     The search books variable defined below will hold the books that meetsthe user search criteria
    */
    var searchbooks = [DatabaseFunctions.Book]()
Class UI ObjectsWe will have the following UI Objects for the search screen:
A Label to stating “Search Books”A Text Field where user can input book or author name to searchA Table View to display searched booksTable 20-3 has the UI Objects definition.
Table 20-3UI Object
// MARK: - UI Objects

--- Page 358 ---
    //Following UI Objects is required for the Search Screen
    /*
     A Label to define the Search Screen
     a Search Textfied where user can input his/her search criteria
     a table view to diaplay the search result
     */
    let applicationLabel:UILabel = {
        let label = UILabel()
        label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        label.backgroundColor = .white
        label.numberOfLines = 4
        label.textColor = .black
        label.textAlignment = .center
       return label
    }()
    let searchTextField:UITextField = {
       let textField = UITextField()
       textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
       textField.backgroundColor = .white
       textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
       textField.attributedPlaceholder = NSAttributedString(string: “SearchTerms”, attributes: [NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor: UIColor.gray])
       textField.textColor = .black
       return textField
    }()
    let searchTableView:UITableView = {
        let tableView = UITableView()
        tableView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
        tableView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 255/255, green: 253/255,blue: 208/255, alpha: 1)
        tableView.layer.cornerRadius = 5
        tableView.layer.borderWidth = 1
        tableView.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
        tableView.isScrollEnabled = false
        return tableView
    }()
Screen Setup

--- Page 359 ---
This section will setup the search screen and will draw all UI Objects
View Did LoadThe system-defined viewDidLoad method is the first function which will be called when thesearch view controller opens. From this method, we will call our custom “bookQuery” functionto get all books from the iCloud database. As querying iCloud is a resource intensive operation,we will first get all books in a local Book object array. All searches will be executed against thelocal Book Array. The code details are in Table 20-4.
Table 20-4Lifecycle Methods
//MARK: - Lifecycle Methods
    /*
     Leveraging the default viewDidLoad method to initiate a custom functionbookQuery to retrieve all books in an array. Our search will be against alocal variable to avoid resource intensive operation
     */
    override func viewDidLoad() {
        super.viewDidLoad()
       bookQuery()
    }
Book Query functionThis function calls the Database Functions Book Query function and waits for its completion.The code details are in Table 20-5.
Table 20-5Book Query Function
//MARK: - Book Query
    /*
     The bookQuery function queries the database repository for all books
    */
    fileprivate func bookQuery(){
        databaseFunctions.group.enter()
        databaseFunctions.bookQuery()
        databaseFunctions.group.notify(queue: .main) {
            self.setup()
            self.searchScreen()
        }
    }
Database Function for Book Query

--- Page 360 ---
Open the DatabaseFunctions class and add the function as shown in Table 20-6. This is theiCloud function to query for all available books. Notice that the predicate is set to true (nocondition set, hence will retrieve all books).
Table 20-6Book Query Repository Function
// MARK: - Retrieve All Books
    /*
     bookQuery queries all books from the iCloud repository
    */
    func bookQuery() {
        let pred = NSPredicate(value: true)
        let query = CKQuery(recordType: "Book", predicate: pred)
        let operation = CKQueryOperation(query: query)
        CKContainer.default().privateCloudDatabase.add(operation)
        let ckRecordZoneID = CKRecordZone(zoneName: "SharedZone")
        operation.zoneID = ckRecordZoneID.zoneID
        operation.recordFetchedBlock = { record in
           let book = Book()
            book.bookname = record["bookname"]
            book.authorname = record["authorname"]
            book.genre = record["genre"]
            book.status = record["status"]
            book.reminder = record["reminder"]
            book.favorite = record["favorite"]
            book.recordID = record.recordID
            if(book.favorite == 1){
                self.favbooks.append(book)
            }
            self.books.append(book)
        }
        operation.queryCompletionBlock = { [unowned self] (cursor, error) in
            DispatchQueue.main.async {
                if let error = error {
                    print(error)
                }else {
                    self.syncQueue.async {
                        self.group.leave()
                    }

--- Page 361 ---
                }
            }
        }
    }
SetupOpen your SearchViewController and add the function as shown in Table 20-7. The setupfunction is called once the query is complete and control is returned to the waitingasynchronous function.
Table 20-7Setup Function
/*
     The setup function is called after the book query is completed to set thesearch table, which uses a custom cell for displaying search results. Setupwill also set the delegate for the textfield.
     There are three events defined for the textfield to build a dynanmicsearch table. As user type, the table will be populated with results. TheTextfields will help us to achieve the same
     */
    func setup(){
        searchTableView.delegate = self
        searchTableView.dataSource = self
        searchTableView.register(BookTableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"searchcell")
        searchTableView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 202/255, green:202/255, blue: 202/255, alpha: 1)
        searchTextField.delegate = self
        searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingChanged), for: .editingChanged)
        searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin), for: .editingDidBegin)
        searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidEnd), for: .editingDidEnd)
    }
    1. func setup(){
    Definition of the custom setup function    2. searchTableView.delegate = self
    3. searchTableView.dataSource = self
    4. searchTableView.register(BookTableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier:"searchcell")

--- Page 362 ---
    5. searchTableView.backgroundColor = UIColor.init(red: 202/255, green:202/255, blue: 202/255, alpha: 1)
Setting up the table view delegate and data source reference. Notice that the Cell Type is custom (this wasdefined and explained before). We are also setting the table background color.    6. searchTextField.delegate = self
    7. searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingChanged), for: .editingChanged)
    8. searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidBegin), for: .editingDidBegin)
    9. searchTextField.addTarget(self, action:#selector(textFieldEditingDidEnd), for: .editingDidEnd)
Setting the text field delegate. Also, defining three system-defined events for the text field. The first is thewhen the value change on the text field (as the user types we will do dynamic search, this event will beused to search as user types and will display the result), the second function is invoked when editingbegins (when editing begins, we need to initialize the Search variables so that we are ready for executingthe search. We need to make sure Books class variable has all books and search book class variable isempty), and the third function is when the Editing ends (we need to reset the Book class variables so thatwe are ready for the next search).    10. }
Draw Search ScreenAfter the setup function, searchScreen is the next function (as shown in Table 20-8) called afterthe book query is completed. This draws the screen label and the text field.
Table 20-8Draw Screen Function
/*
     The custom function searchScreen is called after the book query is done(along with the setup function) and it draws two UI Objects on the screen -the label, and the search text field
    */
    func searchScreen(){
        let fontTaskHeader = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 30, weight: .bold)
        let attributesMainHeader: [NSAttributedString.Key: Any] = [
            .font: fontTaskHeader
        ]
        view.addSubview(applicationLabel)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: applicationLabel,constraintField: view!, topAnchor: 40, leftAnchor: 0, rightAnchor: 0,heightAnchor: 40)
        applicationLabel.attributedText = NSAttributedString(string: "SearchBooks", attributes: attributesMainHeader)
        view.addSubview(searchTextField)

--- Page 363 ---
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: searchTextField,constraintField: applicationLabel, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: 40)
    }
Text Field FunctionOur search is dynamic, as the user types, the search table is populated. There are three eventswhich will help us to meet this functionality.
Editing BeginWhen the Editing Begins event is triggered, we will assign all books (stored inDatabaseFunctions books variable) to the class level variable Searchbooks. Code details aredefined in Table 20-9.
Table 20-9Uitextfield Editing Did Begin
/*
     The event textFieldEditingDidBegin is triggered when the Search Textfiledget the focus - we are just making both the books and searchbooks variableto contain all books
     */
    @objc func textFieldEditingDidBegin(sender: UITextField){
        searchbooks = databaseFunctions.books
    }
Editing ChangedEvery time a user types in a letter, this function is called. As we will do dynamic search, we willsearch for the books, draw the table, and refresh the table, every time the user types in a letter.The code details are in Table 20-10.
Table 20-10Uitextfield Changed
/*
     textFieldEditingChanged event is triggered every time a user types. Thefunction will do the following:
     - copy the search results in the books variable, as this will be used todisplay the record in the table
     - takes the currently typed text as input and searches it in the originalsearchbooks variable for both book name and author name. The result isstored in the books variable
     - Remove the table from the view
     - and if any books are found we are making the table visble and reloadingthe data. If not, the table is hidden
    */

--- Page 364 ---
    @objc func textFieldEditingChanged(sender: UITextField) {
        databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks
        databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks.filter {
            item in returnitem.bookname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
        }
        databaseFunctions.books.append(contentsOf: searchbooks.filter {
            item in returnitem.authorname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
        })
        removeTableConstraints()
        drawSearchTable()
        if(databaseFunctions.books.count > 0){
            searchTableView.isHidden = false
            searchTableView.reloadData()
        }else{
            searchTableView.isHidden = true
        }
    }
    1. @objc func textFieldEditingChanged(sender: UITextField) {
    2. databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks
As you recall, when editing begins, we assign all database functions books to the search book variable (thisis because, for displaying the books, the table view refers to “databaseFunctions.books” variable.“searchbooks” variable is used as a temp variable to hold all books, and the “databaseFunctions.books”variable will have a subset of books based on user search).    3. databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks.filter {
    4. item in returnitem.bookname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
    5. }
We are now searching to see if any book name contains the user inputted string – notice we are usingcontains with case insensitive search, so all books will be filtered where the user-typed string existsanywhere in the book name.    6. databaseFunctions.books.append(contentsOf: searchbooks.filter {
    7. item in returnitem.authorname.lowercased().contains(searchTextField.text!.lowercased())
    8. })
Next, we are searching if any author name contains the user inputted string – notice we are using containswith case insensitive search, so, all books will be filtered where the user-typed string exists anywhere inthe book name. notice we are appending the value to “databaseFunctions.books” variable. So, now the“databaseFunctions.books” variable has all books that meet the search criteria.    9. removeTableConstraints()

--- Page 365 ---
Remove the table drawn before. This is a custom function. The definition of the same is explained in thelatter part of this section.    10. drawSearchTable()
Draw the table. This is a custom function. The definition of the same is explained in the latter part of thissection.    11. if(databaseFunctions.books.count > 0){
    12. searchTableView.isHidden = false
    13. searchTableView.reloadData()
    14. }else{
    15. searchTableView.isHidden = true
    16. }
If the search didn’t result in any books, we will keep the table hidden, otherwise we will display the tableand reload all values.    17. }
Editing EndWhen editing ends, we will store the “searchBooks” variable (which has all books) to“databaseFunctions.books” variable. This way, we rest the variables and are ready for anothersearch. The code details are in Table 20-11.
Table 20-11Uitextfield Editing Did End
/*
    The event textFieldEditingDidEnd is triggered when the editing ends on thesearch text field. searchbooks variable, which has the entire search resultis stored back to the books variable. This is done, so that if a new searchis initiated we have all the variables reset to the original values.
    */
    @objc func textFieldEditingDidEnd(sender: UITextField){
        databaseFunctions.books = searchbooks
    }
Pressing the Return Key on KeyboardThe code in Table 20-12 will dismiss the keyboard.
Table 20-12Uitextfield Dismiss Keyboard
/*
     When user clicks on the return button we will dismiss the kepyboard usingthe function below
     */
    func textFieldShouldReturn(_ textField: UITextField) -> Bool{
        searchTextField.resignFirstResponder()

--- Page 366 ---
        return true
    }
Drawing the TableThe code in Table 20-13 will draw the table when search is completed
Table 20-13Draw Search Table
/*
     The custom function drawSearchTable draws the Search Table View, and iscalled every time a user types a string in the text field and there is amatch to display books.
     */
    func drawSearchTable(){
        let tableHeight:CGFloat = CGFloat(databaseFunctions.books.count * 50)
        view.addSubview(searchTableView)
        commonFunctions.setFieldLayout(mainField: searchTableView,constraintField: searchTextField, topAnchor: 60, leftAnchor: 5,rightAnchor: -5, heightAnchor: tableHeight)
    }
Removing the ConstraintsThe code shown in Table 20-14 will remove the constraints as we draw the search table.
Table 20-14Remove Constraints
//MARK: - Remove Constraints
    /*
     Removing the Table Constraints
    */
    func removeTableConstraints(){
        searchTableView.removeConstraints(searchTableView.constraints)
        searchTableView.removeFromSuperview()
    }
Table FunctionTable function as shown in Table 20-15 has the following default functions:
Number of Rows in the Search Table ViewDrawing the Cells with searched booksHeight of the Row

--- Page 367 ---
The Custom Cell has an UI button that displays the book name. The button has atouchUpInside event define, and when user clicks the button, it will display the book detailscreen
Table 20-15Table Rendering Functions
//MARK: - Table Functions
    //This section implements all table view functions
    /*
     The numberOfRowsInSection function will let the table know how many books tdisplay
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) {
        return databaseFunctions.books.count
    }
    /*
     The cellForRowAt draws the cell and display the book and author name
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) UITableViewCell {
        let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "searchcell", for:indexPath) as! BookTableViewCell
        cell.bookLabelButton.contentHorizontalAlignment = .left
        cell.bookLabelButton.setTitle(self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].+ " by, " + self.databaseFunctions.books[indexPath.row].authorname, for: .norm
        cell.bookLabelButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(taskButtonAction), f.touchUpInside)
        cell.bookLabelButton.tag = indexPath.row
        return cell
    }
    /*
     The heightForRowAt function defines the height of cell to be of 50 pixel
    */
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, heightForRowAt indexPath: IndexPathCGFloat {
        return 50.0
    }
    /*
     On the custom cell when user taps on any cell displaying the book and the aname the taskButtonAction function is invoked, which in turn open the book deview controller

--- Page 368 ---
     */
    @objc func taskButtonAction(sender: UIButton){
        let viewController = BookViewController()
        viewController.book = databaseFunctions.books[sender.tag]
        viewController.modalPresentationStyle = .currentContext
        viewController.modalTransitionStyle = .crossDissolve
        self.present(viewController, animated: true, completion: nil)
    }
SummaryThis concludes our learning on creating a professional-looking Book Tracking App. If you havefollowed through all the concepts in the book, you must have on your iPhone a fully functionalBook Tracker App with data persistence in an iCloud repository. In the next section, we willlearn how to publish the application to the App Store.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 369 ---
(1)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to APress Media, LLC, part of
Springer Nature 2023
S. Baruah, S. Baruah, App Development Using iOS iCloud
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-8758-3_21
21. Packaging and Releasing
Shantanu Baruah1 
   and Shaurya Baruah1
Somerset, NJ, USA
 
Now that you have a fully functional professional looking App, it
is time now to learn how to package your App, get it tested in a
controlled audience, and finally, submit it to Apple App Store
Review and approval. Follow this chapter to learn the steps you
need to follow to release your App to the App Store.
Setting Up the Application Logo
Before you are ready to publish the App for testing and
releasing to the App store, we need to create a minimum set of
App icons of the following dimension (please note we are only
creating an iPhone App):
1. 40w:40h Pixels  
2. 60w:60h Pixels  
3. 58w:58h Pixels  

--- Page 370 ---
4. 87w:87h Pixels  
5. 80w:80h Pixels  
6. 120w:120h Pixels  
7. 180w:180h Pixels  
8. 1024w:1024h Pixels 
You can use tools such as Photoshop to create the logos. I
have used GIMP, a freeware to create the Book Tracker App
logo. Once you are done with your design, you can then export
the image to the relevant sizes to PNG (or other file format)
files.
Once the images are ready, please go to the navigator and
click on “Assets” and drag and drop the right image to the right
image holder, as shown in Figure 21-1.


--- Page 371 ---
Figure 21-1 Xcode Assets Screen
Build the Archive and Publish
We are now ready to Archive and Publish the App. Follow the
following steps:
Set Up Test Flight Account
Login to https://appstoreconnect.apple.com using
your apple ID. Once logged in, click on “My Apps”, as shown in
Figure 21-2.
Figure 21-2 App Store Connect – Home Screen
Next, we need to create a shell for our App before we can
publish the App. Click on Add “New App”, as shown in the
screen in Figure 21-3.

--- Page 372 ---
Figure 21-3 App Store Connect – New App Screen
Add the information as shown in Figure 21-4 to the new
application screen: Name, Primary Language, Bundle ID (this
is pre-populated based on the applications you have
created), SKU (This must be unique), and user access. Note:
To Learn more about Apple App Store Connect, please refer
to Apple developer documentation from the following link.

--- Page 373 ---
Figure 21-4 App Store Connect – New App Popup Screen
https://developer.apple.com/support/app-
store-connect/
Menu Option
Once we have the shell ready, get back to the Xcode and from
the Top Menu, select Product ➤  Archive, as shown in Figure 21-
5.

--- Page 374 ---
Figure 21-5 Archive Menu Option
Distribute App
If there are no errors in the code, the archive will complete
successfully, and you will be prompted with a screen as shown
in Figure 21-6. Click the “Distribute App” option.

--- Page 375 ---
Figure 21-6 App Distribution
Keep the default option selected “App Store Connect” page
as shown in Figure 21-7.
Figure 21-7 App Distribution – App Store Connect
Select the default “Upload” option, as shown in Figure 21-8.

--- Page 376 ---
Figure 21-8 App Distribution – Upload
Enter details on the Preparing App record, (Name, SKU,
Primary Language, and Bundle Identifier) – the details will be
picked from your App properties as shown in Figure 21-9.
Figure 21-9 App Distribution – Product Details

--- Page 377 ---
In the next screen(as shown in Figure 21-10) select all the
options.
Figure 21-10 App Distribution - Distribution Option
Use the automatic signing option, as shown in Figure 21-11.
And finally, upload the content, as shown in Figure 21-12.


--- Page 378 ---
Figure 21-11 App Distribution - Sign In Option
Figure 21-12 App Distribution – Upload Option
Figure 21-13 Application Setup

--- Page 379 ---
Figure 21-14 Project Properties – Cloudkit Properties
Setting Up the App in App Store
Login to https://appstoreconnect.apple.com using
your apple ID. Once logged in, click on “My Apps” and select the
App “MyTestLibrary”
Click on the first menu option “1.0 Prepare for
Submission”. In this screen, we need to enter the following
information:
1. App Preview Screen for the relevant screen types  
2. Promotional Text  
3. Description of your App  
4. Keywords, which will help to search your App in App store  

--- Page 380 ---
5. A Support URL – where users can reach in case of questions
or errors  
6. A Marketing URL, describing your App in detail  
7. Version no. of the App  
8. Copyright information  
9. Build, you can choose from a list of released versions  
All this information will be used by the App Review board to
review your App. Once done, you can submit for review.
Promote Development Database to
Production Database
One of the actions we need to perform before releasing the App
is to promote our development database to the production
environment. Follow along the following steps to achieve the
same:
Go to your CloudKit Console as shown. You can reach the
console by clicking on “CloudKit Console” from the project
settings.
CloudKit Database
From the main screen, click the CloudKit Database block, as
shown in Figure 21-15.

--- Page 381 ---
Figure 21-15 Project Properties – Cloudkit Properties
Select Database
Select the database from the top drop down. And select the
option Deploy Schema Changes from the left tree menu options,
as shown in Figure 21-16.
Figure 21-16 Project Properties – Schema Properties
Deploy Changes

--- Page 382 ---
You will be prompted with a screen confirming deployment.
Go ahead and deploy it, as shown in Figure 21-17. You are ready
with your App distribution process.
Figure 21-17 Deployment Screen

--- Page 383 ---
Invite Test Users in Test Flight
Before releasing your App to the App Store, it is a good practice
to get your App tested by a set of users. You can do this through
Test Flight. The Users who will test your App need to be set up
in the Appstoreconnect. com portal and the users need to
download Testflight on their iPhone. When you publish an App
for testing it appears in the Test Flight App. Users can then
download the App from Test Flight and use it like a beta
version.
While testing, users can directly send feedback to the Test
Flight Center. Also, in case of crashes, a screen capture can also
be sent. We can then analyze the crashes in our Xcode build, fix
issues, and release new patches for users to test. Follow the
following step to setup test users:
Login in to https://appstoreconnect.apple.com
and click on TestFlight. From there, you can invite users to
test your App, as shown in Figure 21-18.

--- Page 384 ---
Figure 21-18 App Store Connect Screen
Test-Driven Development
Modern software development demands Test Driven
Development (TDD). TDD has many benefits as outlined in the
following:
The test cases dictate the development process, which allows
comprehensive code coverage for multiple user scenarios.
The documentation always stays current, increasing the
readability of the code.
Helps in Peer based development.
Future refactoring becomes easy to maintain.
When we are creating a project, we can choose to include
unit test cases, as shown in Figure 21-19.
In the project, we can then create a class object of type UI
Test Case Class (as shown in Figure 21-20), and write our test
method and code in the class accordingly.

--- Page 385 ---
Figure 21-19 Project Creation Screen – Include Tests.

--- Page 386 ---
Figure 21-20 UI Test Case Class File Option
This book does not provide a comprehensive code for TDD
development. We encourage the users to use this as a base to
learn and implement TDD into your project.
Summary
This was the final chapter of our book. We have learned not
only how to interact with an iCloud repository for performing
CRUD functions, but also creating an aesthetically appealing
professional looking App. We also learned how to extensively
manipulate display views using Table Views by customizing the
Table Cells, use events best coding for better user interaction,
and code-based screen designs.

--- Page 387 ---
Extension is another important leverage we have in iOS
coding to embed functionalities beyond the core development
environment. We learned about notification and iCloud
Extensions in this book. Finally, in this chapter, we learned how
to make our code ready to be deployed in production and send
for the App Review process.
We hope you had fun writing code and seeing your App
come to life as you went through the 21 chapters of the book.
Our intent was to provide a comprehensive learning in native
iOS development and a strong bedrock for you to explore the
art of possibilities in iOS programming. Please let us know the
Apps you will create using the learnings of the book. Happy
coding.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 388 ---
Index
A
Add book
Add view controller
designing
running code
running program
UI objects
UI text field
view controller
Add Book Screen
Add Book Tab Bar
AddBookViewController
class objects
class variables
DataBaseFunctions Class
genre and status objects
array objects
class and static variable
CommonVariables class
genre class
genre setup function
object type
status class
status setup function
reset function
save book function
alert control
asynchronous loop
author’s name

--- Page 389 ---
canSave variable
custom function
genre name
iCloud function query
Ok action
reset field
statements
status
validation
var variable
save book record
attribute
custom function
iCloud
SharedZone
zone ID information
screen load event
add book screen
functions
setup function
table functions
display cell value
header
row height
rows
sections
select row action
text fields events
keyboard should return
visual display
UI objects
genre and status

--- Page 390 ---
input text field/author name input
navigation bar/save and reset
table views
variables
AddBookViewController method
B
Backend as a Service (BaaS)
Book detail screen
bookQuery function
Book reminder
image view tap gestures
notification screen
permission request
remainder popup screen
reminderButtonAction
remove reminder screen
reset reminder
save remainder
setup reminder
update reminder method
iCloud repository
Books notes
adding notes
cancel button
CellforRowAt function
custom function
If Save action
navigation bar function
popup screen
remove constraints
BookNotesViewController

--- Page 391 ---
custom table view cell
delete notes
display screen
iconButtonAction
lifecycle and setup functions
notesButtonAction function
query function
save book method
iCloud repository
tab bar function
table view function
Tableview trailing swipe
UI objects
variable
viewDidLoad function
books variable
Book Tracker App
controller
create application
BookViewController
BookDetails
custom cell
header height
header view
row height
rows
sections
tab bar function
table, displaying
book details screen
class inheritance
class variables

--- Page 392 ---
creation
drawing screen
functionalities
set book details function
setup function
UI objects
reminder popup screen
six view blocks
table/popup view
UI table view cell
class level variable
definition
draw cell object
UI objects
View load function
BookViewController class
C
CKQueryOperation function
CloudKit
containers
dashboard
history
key-value storage
parts
services
setting up
Xcode iCloud
Xcode setting
CloudKit dashboard
accessing
API access

--- Page 393 ---
book record type
Book Tracker App
container permission
data
home screen
indexes screen
logs
schema
telemetry
understanding
usage
CloudKit framework
CloudKit function
CommonFunctions class
CommonVariables class
Constraints
Core swift concepts
classes/structures
array
beautifying strings
functions
life cycle methods
scope
left/var
loop controls
for-in loops
for-in loops, range
while loop
syntax
CG color
methods
properties

--- Page 394 ---
RGB
UINavigationBar
type casting
book class
count fiction
defined color
fiction class
type book class
types
UIAlertController
alert/user action
defining alert
display
UI color
dynamic system colors
getting system colors
guidelines
system colors
UIImageView
create
methods
properties
UITableView
cell heights
create
delegates
display
drawing
header
selection of row
setting
swiping function

--- Page 395 ---
UITextField
create
variables
viewDidAppear
viewDidDisappear
viewDidLoad
viewWillAppear
viewWillDisappear
CRUD functions
Custom-defined function
Custom function
D
DatabaseFunctions
DatabaseFunctions class
DatabaseFunctions file
DatabaseFunctions.swift file
Delegations
calling
definition
implement
protocol function
protocol variable
reference setup
Delete block
book detail screen
DatabaseFunctions class
deleteButtonAction function
waiting block
DispatchGroup functions
Display book screen
drawing screen

--- Page 396 ---
main display
top
initial setup
lifecycle method
class-level variables
query books
reading button action
setup function
table setup
cell screen
creation option
custom button
custom cell
functions
header display
inheritance
top view blocks
UI objects
view button action
E
Edit Book View Controller
class level variables
code
completeButtonAction function
navigation bar
save book
setup function
update book record
editingChanged
F, G, H

--- Page 397 ---
Favorite books
animation function
favorite screen
frequency button action function
update favorite status
Fiction class
I, J
iCloud database
create function file
functions
post save
reset field
save book record
saving book
validation
values
K
Key-value storage
L
Life cycle methods
M
modifyRecordsCompletionBlock
modifyRecordsOperation
N
Non-fiction class
Notification Center
O

--- Page 398 ---
Object-oriented programming
P, Q, R
Packaging and releasing
App distribution
App store connect
options
product details
sign in option
upload option
application icons
application logo
application setup
App store connect
home screen
new App popup screen
new App screen
archive and publish
menu option
test flight account
development database to production database
CloudKit console
deployment screen
project properties
select database
steps
test users
Xcode assets screen
S
Search book
class variables

--- Page 399 ---
constraints, removing
screen setup
DatabaseFunctions, book query
draw screen function
query function
setup function
viewDidLoad method
SearchViewController
table, drawing
table function
text field function
editing begins
editing changed
editing ends
return key
UI objects
Search screen
Shared books tab
query functions
scene delegate file
acceptSharing
CKAcceptSharesOperation
CloudKit
Our View
viewControllers attribute
internal func windowScene
Shared database function
Share record function
task zones
Sharing contents
call back functions
CloudKit toolkit

--- Page 400 ---
share record functions
bookShare function
screen simulator book tracking App
share book option
shareButtonAction
share record functions
book record
BookShare function
CKShare
error
iCloud database
popup screen
queue
recipient user
recordToShare
shared database
share screen
sharing controller screen
waiting block
Storyboard
Swipe function
syncQueue
T
Table delegate
Table functions
Table view
aspects
cellForRowAt
delegation
drawing
objects

--- Page 401 ---
run the program
table cell
table header
text label
taskRecords
Test driven development (TDD)
Test flight
Text field
U
UI objects
UITextFieldDelegate
User searched books
V, W
Variable
definition
View controller
assigning
assignment
create
options
setup function
X, Y, Z
Xcode
auto-completion
install
interface
storyboard
OceanofPDF.com