--- Page 1 ---
 

--- Page 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
 
Ultimate iOS App
Development Guide
 
 
Master iOS App Development by Building
Five End-to-End iOS applications Using
Swift, Xcode, HealthKit, and CoreML
 
 
Surabhi Chopada
 
 
www.orangeava.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 4 ---
Copyright © 2024 Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without
the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
 
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure
the accuracy of the information presented. However, the information
contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or
implied. Neither the author nor Orange Education Pvt Ltd or its dealers
and distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged
to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
 
Orange Education Pvt Ltd has endeavored to provide trademark
information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this
book by the appropriate use of capital. However, Orange Education
Pvt Ltd cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information. The use of
general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service
marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a
specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
 
First Published: August 2024
 

--- Page 5 ---
Published by: Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
 
Address: 9, Daryaganj, Delhi, 110002, India
 
275 New North Road Islington Suite 1314 London,
 
N1 7AA, United Kingdom
 
ISBN (PBK): 978-81-97651-29-8
 
ISBN (E-BOOK): 978-81-97651-25-0
 
Scan the QR code to explore our entire catalogue
 
 
www.orangeava.com

--- Page 6 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
Dedicated To
 
My beloved grandparents:
 
Shakuntala and Zankarmal Chopada
 
My supportive parents, Neeta and Tushar
 
And my inspiring brother, Yash
 
Thank you for your unconditional support and encouragement
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
About the Author
 
Surabhi Chopada is an experienced iOS Developer originally from
Ahmednagar, Maharashtra, India. She pursued an Engineering degree
in Information Technology from PVG Pune. After gaining valuable
experience in India, she relocated to Copenhagen, Denmark, to
continue her professional journey. Her path to becoming an iOS
Developer is truly inspiring. Her interest in iOS was sparked by her
fascination with the iPhone 4. Despite not initially having access to a
Mac, she managed to enroll in a brief three-month iOS development
course and later taught herself in this field. Today, her expertise has
culminated in the writing of this book. Her story is a testament to the
power of passion and determination in achieving career success. It
illustrates that with perseverance and self-motivation, one can
overcome obstacles and reach their goals.
 
With a career spanning over a decade, Surabhi Chopada has been
actively involved in iOS development since 2013. She possesses
extensive experience in both Objective-C and Swift, with a diverse
background in app development across various domains, including
Banking and Finance, Medical and Healthcare, IoT, AI-ML, and
Enterprise applications. Furthermore, she has showcased her
knowledge through published articles and has also excelled in teaching
iOS application development, sharing valuable insights and skills with
aspiring developers. Beyond her technical expertise, she is passionate

--- Page 9 ---
about mentoring aspiring students who aim to enter the technology
field. Additionally, she is actively involved with an organization
dedicated to promoting and increasing the representation of women in
technology.
 
Her motivation for writing this book was to provide a starting point for
anyone seeking practical experience in iOS development. She
envisioned this book as a valuable reference for both beginners and
those looking to deepen their understanding. Each chapter has been
carefully crafted to incorporate real-world applications and current
industry practices. Her aim was to bridge the gap between theoretical
knowledge and practical implementation, making this book a robust
resource for aspiring iOS developers.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 10 ---
About the Technical Reviewer
 
Aman Kesarwani is a passionate iOS developer with over 8 years of
experience in crafting innovative and user-friendly mobile
applications. He holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Computer Science and
has a deep understanding of the iOS development landscape. In his
current role as Senior iOS Developer at Priceline, Aman spearheads
the development of high-performing iOS applications. His
responsibilities include:
  
Leading the technical vision: Aman actively participates in the design
and planning stages of projects, ensuring that applications align with
user needs and business goals.
 
Building and maintaining robust applications: He possesses expertise
in Swift, Objective-C, Xcode, and various iOS frameworks, allowing
him to write clean, efficient, and maintainable code.
 
Collaboration and mentorship: Aman fosters a collaborative
environment by working closely with designers, UI/UX professionals,
and other developers. He also enjoys mentoring junior developers and
sharing his knowledge.
 

--- Page 11 ---
Staying ahead of the curve: Aman is a continuous learner, actively
keeping himself updated with the latest trends and technologies in the
iOS development world, including VisionOS and Data Science.
 
Throughout his career, Aman has successfully delivered numerous
impactful applications used by millions of users. He is a strong
advocate for clean code principles and delivers projects on time.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 12 ---
Acknowledgements
 
There are several individuals to whom I would like to express my
deepest gratitude for their unconditional support during the writing of
this book.
 
First and foremost, I am profoundly thankful to my parents,
grandparents, brother, and entire family. Their blessings,
encouragement, and constant motivation have been invaluable
throughout this journey. Without their support, completing this book
would not have been possible.
 
I also wish to extend my heartfelt thanks to my friends for their
unconditional support and for always reminding me of my strengths.
Their encouragement has been a great source of inspiration.
 
Furthermore, I am deeply grateful to all my colleagues and the
incredible companies I have had the privilege to work with. Their
collective wisdom and the opportunities for learning and growth they
provided have significantly contributed to my ability to write this book
and share my knowledge.
 
A special thank you goes to the team for their incredible support and
for providing me with this opportunity to publish the book. Their

--- Page 13 ---
belief in my abilities has been instrumental in bringing this project to
you. I would also like to thank Mr. Aman Kesarwani for his technical
feedback, which helped me improve the chapters.
 
Lastly, I want to express my gratitude to God for granting me the
strength and opportunities to reach this stage in my career. I have
experienced a sense of magic and wonder at each step in my career,
and I hope to continue learning and sharing my knowledge with the
world.
 
Thank you all for being part of this incredible journey.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 14 ---
Preface
 
In this book, we will guide you through the core concepts and
techniques that will help you in iOS app creation. As we progress
through each chapter, we will delve into the essential components of
iOS app development. With each concept, we will provide clear
explanations and practical examples that enable you to apply your
knowledge in real-world applications. Along the way, we will look into
creating some exciting projects that allow you to put your skills into
practice. From building a simple to-do list app to more advanced
projects like HealthKit and Core ML integration, each project will help
you understand specific concepts. This book will also cover the app
distribution process to the App Store. Whether you are a budding
developer in search of a solid foundation or a seasoned developer
aiming to broaden your expertise, this book will be your guide on the
path to achieving success in iOS development. The goal of writing this
book was to bridge the gap between theoretical knowledge and
practical application, making it a valuable resource for aspiring iOS
developers.
 
This book is thoughtfully structured into 10 chapters. The initial
chapter provides a fundamental explanation of core concepts, serving
as a solid foundation for beginners. Each subsequent chapter extends
into practical sample projects, enabling readers to learn and apply

--- Page 15 ---
concepts in a hands-on manner. This book is designed to be your
practical guide on the journey to creating iOS applications.
 
The chapters seamlessly blend theoretical iOS and Swift concepts with
practical implementation, guiding you through the development of
projects that range from basic to advanced levels. These projects are
carefully selected to build a strong foundation in application
development, equipping you with the necessary skills to excel in the
field. Whether you are a novice or looking to deepen your expertise,
this book offers a robust resource that supports your growth as an iOS
developer.
 
Chapter 1: This chapter serves as an introductory guide to iOS
development, focusing on the essential aspects of iOS app
development. It begins by exploring the fundamental concepts of
creating iOS applications. You will gain insights into the basics of iOS
app development and tools utilized in the iOS development process.
Additionally, the chapter will provide an overview of setting up Xcode
IDE used for iOS development.
 
Chapter 2: This chapter examines the fundamental structure of an iOS
app and explores principles related to user interface design and layout.
You will understand the significance of utilizing storyboards, delve
into the lifecycle of ViewControllers, and gain insights into
implementing navigation within your app.
 

--- Page 16 ---
Chapter 3: This chapter explores Swift's features and its advantages
over Objective C. We will delve into the core concepts that make Swift
an exceptional programming language.
 
Chapter 4: This chapter provides hands-on experience to explore key
aspects of app development, including user interface design, data
management, user interaction, and more. By the end of this chapter,
you will have a functional To-Do list app that you can use to keep
track of tasks.
 
Chapter 5: This chapter explores fundamental concepts crucial for
building a weather forecast app. We will start by learning how to get a
user's current location using Core Location. Next, we will delve into
the world of API network requests, learning how to fetch real-time
data from external sources. We will also cover the topic of JSON
parsing. With a firm understanding of these core concepts, we will
apply them in practice by creating a simple and practical weather
forecast app.
 
Chapter 6: This chapter delves into the integration of social media into
our iOS app, using Facebook as our example platform. We will explore
essential functionalities, including creating an app on the Facebook
Developers Portal, implementing Facebook login within the app,
viewing user profiles, and enabling post sharing on user accounts. By
the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding of
seamlessly integrating Facebook into your app.

--- Page 17 ---
 
Chapter 7: This chapter will help you understand HealthKit and its
practical applications. Furthermore, we will guide you through the
creation of a sample app, demonstrating how to effectively read data
from HealthKit and write data back to it. By the end of this chapter,
you will have an overview of how to use HealthKit to its fullest
potential for enhancing the health and fitness app’s functionality.
 
Chapter 8: This chapter explores Core ML, examining its features,
functionalities, and practical application. We will also delve into the
Vision framework, using it to guide the creation of a practical image
classification application. This hands-on approach aims to provide
valuable insights into Core ML and the Vision framework, enhancing
your understanding of machine learning on the iOS platform.
 
Chapter 9: This chapter will guide you through different aspects of unit
testing, including its benefits and illustrative examples. Additionally,
we will explore essential topics such as debugging in iOS.
Furthermore, we will look into the process of deploying an application
to the App Store.
 
Chapter 10: This chapter focuses on SwiftUI, exploring its core
principles and advantages. We will also delve into the practical aspects
of implementing SwiftUI layouts. Furthermore, we will examine the
process of integrating SwiftUI into existing iOS applications. This
integration will involve understanding how SwiftUI interacts with

--- Page 18 ---
existing UIKit components and adapting your codebase to
accommodate SwiftUI. In addition to SwiftUI, we will also explore the
concept called SwiftData.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 19 ---
Downloading the code
bundles and colored images
 
Please follow the link or scan the QR code to download the
Code Bundles and Images of the book:
 
https://github.com/ava-orange-education/Ultimate-iOS-App-
Development-Guide 
 
The code bundles and images of the book are also hosted on
https://rebrand.ly/153801
 

--- Page 20 ---
 
In case there’s an update to the code, it will be updated on the existing
GitHub repository.
 
Errata
 
We take immense pride in our work at Orange Education Pvt Ltd and
follow best practices to ensure the accuracy of our content to provide
an indulging reading experience to our subscribers. Our readers are our
mirrors, and we use their inputs to reflect and improve upon human
errors, if any, that may have occurred during the publishing processes
involved. To let us maintain the quality and help us reach out to any
readers who might be having difficulties due to any unforeseen errors,
please write to us at :
 
errata@orangeava.com
 
Your support, suggestions, and feedback are highly appreciated.

--- Page 21 ---
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 22 ---
DID YOU KNOW
 
Did you know that Orange Education Pvt Ltd offers eBook versions of
every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can
upgrade to the eBook version at www.orangeava.com and as a print
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get
in touch with us at: info@orangeava.com for more details.
 
At you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on
AVA™ Books and eBooks.
 
PIRACY
 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the
location address or website name. Please contact us at
info@orangeava.com with a link to the material.
 
ARE YOU INTERESTED IN AUTHORING WITH US?
 
If there is a topic that you have expertise in, and you are interested in
either writing or contributing to a book, please write to us at We are on

--- Page 23 ---
a journey to help developers and tech professionals to gain insights on
the present technological advancements and innovations happening
across the globe and build a community that believes Knowledge is
best acquired by sharing and learning with others. Please reach out to
us to learn what our audience demands and how you can be part of this
educational reform. We also welcome ideas from tech experts and help
them build learning and development content for their domains.
 
REVIEWS
 
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not
leave a review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers
can then see and use your unbiased opinion to make purchase
decisions. We at Orange Education would love to know what you think
about our products, and our authors can learn from your feedback.
Thank you!
 
For more information about Orange Education, please visit
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 24 ---
Table of Contents
 
1. Introduction to iOS Development
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to iOS
Functionalities of iOS App
Development Process
Tools for Development
Xcode Setup
Creating Your First iOS Project
Introduction to Xcode IDE
Architecture Patterns
MVC: Model-View-Controller
MVVM: Model-View-ViewModel
Conclusion
 
2. Getting Started with iOS App Development
Introduction
Structure
Structure of an iOS App
ViewController Lifecycle
Introduction to Storyboard
Design Using Storyboard
Layouts

--- Page 25 ---
Programmatic User Interface
Storyboard User Interface
Navigation in iOS
Conclusion
Points to Remember
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
 
3. Swift Programming Language Basics
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to Swift
Advantages of Swift
Syntax and Readability
Safety by Design
Fast and Efficient
Dynamic Libraries
Interactive Playground
Interoperability with Objective-C
Strong Community and Open-Source
Functional Programming Paradigm
Memory Management
Support Across Apple Ecosystem
Swift Versus Objective C
Variables, Data Types, and Operators
Operators
Collection Types

--- Page 26 ---
Optionals
Control Flow and Decision-Making Statements
Functions
Closures
Protocols and Extensions
Extensions
Conclusion
Points to Remember
References
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
 
4. Building a To-Do List App
Introduction
Structure
Creating User Interface
Navigation Setup
TableView Setup
Introduction to UserDefaults
Add DetailsViewController
Conclusion
References
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
 
5. Developing a Weather App

--- Page 27 ---
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to Core Location
Get Current User Location
UI Setup for Weather App
Setup App Icon and Launch Screen
Web Service Integration and JSON Parsing
Conclusion
References
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
 
6. Integrating Social Media
Introduction
Structure
Creating an App on Facebook Portal
Facebook SDK Setup
User Interface Creation
Viewing User Profile
Sharing a Post on Facebook
Conclusion
References
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
 
7. Creating Fitness Tracking App Using HealthKit

--- Page 28 ---
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to HealthKit
Applications of HealthKit
HealthKit Setup
User-Interface Creation
Access Permission
Read Data Using HealthKit
Write Data Using HealthKit
Conclusion
References
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
 
8. Building an Image Recognition App Using Core ML and VisionKit
Introduction
Structure
Understanding Machine learning
Introduction to Core ML
Introduction to Vision Framework
Creating a Sample Image Classification App
Building UI
Initiating ImagePicker
Image Classification
Conclusion
References
Multiple Choice Questions

--- Page 29 ---
Answers
 
9. Testing, Debugging, and Deployment
Introduction
Structure
Testing in iOS
Benefits of Unit Testing
Introduction to XCTest framework
UI Testing
Debugging in iOS
Certificates and Profiles
Generate CSR
Create a Certificate in Apple Developer Portal
AppStore Deployment
Conclusion
References
Multiple Choice Questions
Answers
 
10. Advance Concepts
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to SwiftUI
Building Basic Layout Using SwiftUI
Using SwiftUI Along with UIKit
Introduction to SwiftData

--- Page 30 ---
Conclusion
References
Multiple Choice Question
Answers
 
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 31 ---
CHAPTER 1
 
Introduction to iOS Development
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 32 ---
 
Introduction
 
This chapter serves as an introductory guide to iOS development,
focusing on the essential aspects of iOS app development. It begins by
exploring the fundamental concepts of creating iOS applications. You
will gain insights into the basics of iOS app development and tools
utilized in the iOS development process. Additionally, the chapter will
provide an overview of setting up Xcode, Apple’s integrated
development environment (IDE) specifically designed for iOS and
macOS app development. You will learn about the installation process,
configuration options, and the essential features and functionalities
offered by Xcode. By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid
understanding of the basics of iOS app development, along with the
necessary knowledge to configure Xcode and navigate its IDE.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 33 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
  
Introduction to iOS
 
Functionalities of iOS App
 
Development Process
 
Tools for Development
 
Xcode Setup
 
Creating Your First Project
 
Introduction to Xcode IDE
 
Architecture Patterns
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 34 ---
 
Introduction to iOS
 
iOS made its first appearance in the tech world on June 29, 2007, when
Apple unveiled the iPhone; thus, introducing its groundbreaking
mobile operating system, initially referred to as iPhone OS. Since then,
iOS has gone through multiple updates, introducing new features,
enhancements, and compatibility with newer iPhone, iPad, and iPod
touch models. Over the years, iOS has evolved to become a robust
platform, powering millions of devices worldwide and serving as a
foundation for a vast ecosystem of applications and services.
Consequently, as the use of iOS devices continues to soar worldwide,
the demand for iOS applications has experienced an exponential
growth.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 35 ---
 
Functionalities of iOS App
 
iOS apps are designed to run on Apple’s iOS operating system and
utilize its functionalities and capabilities. Here’s a general overview of
how iOS apps work:
  
App Launch
 
Upon tapping the icon, the iOS operating system receives the signal and
starts loading the app into the device’s memory. This involves
transferring the necessary files and data from the device’s storage to the
RAM (Random Access Memory), where the app can run efficiently.
 
User Interface (UI)
 
The app’s user interface is displayed on the device’s screen, allowing
you to interact with the app. The UI consists of various screens, views,
such as buttons, text fields, images and controls designed using Apple’s
UIKit framework. Users can navigate between different screens and
interact with buttons, input fields, and other UI elements.
 
App Logic
 

--- Page 36 ---
The app’s logic, implemented through programming code, determines
how the app behaves and responds to user input. This code is written in
Swift or Objective-C and defines the app’s functionalities, data
handling, and business logic.
 
Interacting with Device Features
 
iOS apps can leverage the device’s built-in features and capabilities.
They can access the camera, microphone, GPS, accelerometer, and other
hardware components to enhance app functionality. This is
accomplished using the iOS SDK and various frameworks provided by
Apple.
 
Networking and Data
 
iOS apps often interact with remote servers or web services to fetch or
send data. They can communicate with backend APIs, download
content, upload user-generated data, and synchronize information with
cloud storage.
 
Persistence
 
Apps often need to store data locally on the device. This can include
user preferences, cached content, or user-generated data. iOS provides
several options for persistent storage, such as Core Data, Swift Data,
SQLite databases, UserDefaults or file systems.

--- Page 37 ---
 
Background Execution
 
iOS allows apps to perform certain tasks in the background, even when
the app is not actively running or visible. This includes tasks like
downloading content, playing audio, or updating data. Background
execution is subject to specific limitations and guidelines imposed by
Apple to optimize battery life and system performance.
 
App Lifecycle
 
iOS manages the lifecycle of apps to ensure efficient memory usage and
battery optimization. Apps can transition between different states, such
as active, inactive, background, or suspended, depending on user
interactions and system events. You can refer to Figure 1.1 for better
understanding of the app lifecycle. Developers can respond to these state
transitions to manage resources and provide a seamless user experience.
 

--- Page 38 ---
 
Figure 1.1: App lifecycle
 
App Store Distribution
 

--- Page 39 ---
Once an app is developed and tested, it can be submitted to the App
Store for review and distribution. Apple reviews the app to ensure
compliance with their guidelines and standards. Upon approval, the app
is made available for users to download and install on their iOS devices.
 
Overall, iOS apps work by combining user interface elements,
programming logic, device features, networking capabilities, and data
persistence to provide a rich and interactive user experience on Apple’s
iOS platform.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 40 ---
 
Development Process
 
iOS apps can be developed using either Swift or Objective-C
programming languages. Swift, introduced by Apple in 2014, is a
modern and powerful language designed specifically for iOS, macOS,
watchOS, VisionOS and tvOS development. Objective-C is an older
language still in use and has a large codebase of existing iOS apps.
  
Planning:
  
Clarify the app’s objectives, target audience, and essential features.
 
Perform comprehensive market research and competitive analysis.
 
Develop user personas to understand the needs and preferences of your
target users.
 
Outline user stories to define the app’s functionality and user
interactions.
 
Requirement Gathering:
  

--- Page 41 ---
Determine the functional and non-functional criteria for the
application.
 
Outline the project’s boundaries and compile a list of features.
 
Engage with stakeholders to collect precise requirements.
 
UI/UX Design:
  
Generate wireframes to visualize the user interface (UI) and user
experience (UX) of the app.
 
Refine the design through iterations, incorporating feedback and
conducting usability testing.
 
Conclude the visual and interaction design for the app.
 
Development:
  
Configure the development environment, which includes setting up
Xcode and the required SDKs.
 
Execute the implementation of the app’s features and functionality in
alignment with the specified requirements.

--- Page 42 ---
 
Define the project architecture which we will see in the upcoming
section.
 
Developers write the app’s code using programming languages like
Swift or Objective-C.
 
Conduct continuous testing and debugging of the app as it progresses.
 
Quality Assurance:
  
Conduct a range of tests, including functional testing, usability testing,
and performance testing.
 
Identify and resolve any bugs and issues encountered during the
testing phase.
 
Perform compatibility testing on various iOS devices and screen sizes.
 
Distribution and Deployment:
  
Set up a developer account on the Apple Developer Program.
 
Generate the required certificates and provisioning profiles for the
application.

--- Page 43 ---
 
Test the app using the TestFlight tool provided by Apple for beta
testing.
 
Submit the app to the App Store for review and approval. Apple
reviews each app for compliance with their guidelines, ensuring it
meets quality standards and doesn’t violate any policies.
 
Release and Maintenance:
  
Once approved, distribute the app publicly by publishing it on the App
Store.
 
Monitor user feedback and analytics to identify areas for enhancement.
 
Roll out updates that address bug fixes, enhance features, and optimize
performance.
 
Continuously maintain and support the app by addressing user
concerns and ensuring compatibility with new iOS versions.
  
We will be looking into each of these processes in more detail in the
upcoming chapters.

--- Page 44 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 45 ---
 
Tools for Development
 
iOS app development is primarily done on Mac computers. You will
need a Mac device, such as a MacBook, iMac, or Mac mini, to run the
necessary development tools and software.
 
Xcode is the official Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for
iOS app development. It includes a suite of tools, such as a code editor,
debugger, Interface builder, and simulator, all essential for building,
testing, and deploying iOS apps. Xcode also provides access to the iOS
SDK and frameworks. Xcode includes an iOS Simulator, allowing you
to test and preview your app on virtual iOS devices without the need
for physical devices. The simulator enables you to simulate various
screen sizes, device orientations, and iOS versions to ensure your app
functions correctly across different configurations.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 46 ---
 
Xcode Setup
 
Xcode is the IDE used for iOS app development. We will be using the
minimum Xcode 15 for development. We will need to download and
set up the Xcode to start the iOS development.
 
The setup process for Xcode involves several steps. Here’s a general
outline of how to set up Xcode on your Mac:
  
Check System Requirements
 
Ensure that your Mac meets the minimum system requirements for
running Xcode. This typically includes having a compatible version of
macOS and sufficient storage space. We will need to have a minimum
macOS Ventura 13.5. If you are on the previous version, please update
your MacOS to the minimum required version before installing Xcode.
 
Install Xcode from the App Store
 
Xcode is available for download from the Mac App Store. Open the
App Store on your Mac and search for “Xcode”. Click the Xcode app
and then click the “Get” button to initiate the installation process.

--- Page 47 ---
 
Authenticate and Install
 
Depending on your App Store settings, you may be prompted to enter
your Apple ID and password to authenticate the installation. Once
authenticated, the Xcode app will begin downloading and installing on
your Mac. The process may take some time, as Xcode is a large
application. After installation is completed, you will find an Xcode
application in your application folder.
 
Agree to Terms and Conditions
 
After the installation is complete, launch Xcode from the Applications
folder. You will be presented with the Xcode Welcome window, where
you need to agree to the license terms and conditions.
 
Additional Components
 
Xcode may prompt you to install additional components, such as
command-line tools or simulators. These components are necessary for
specific development tasks, so it’s recommended to install them. The
installation process may take a few minutes. Each Xcode version
comes with the latest iOS version simulator.
 
Configuration and Preferences

--- Page 48 ---
 
Once Xcode is fully installed, you can configure your preferences
according to your development needs. This includes setting up source
control, key bindings, themes, and other preferences. You can access
these options by going to Xcode > Preferences in the menu bar.
 
Verify Installation
 
To ensure Xcode is installed correctly, you can launch a new project or
open an existing one. This will confirm that Xcode is ready for iOS
app development.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 49 ---
 
Creating Your First iOS Project
 
Now that we have completed the installation of the Xcode, let’s create the
first project. We will follow the following steps:
  
Launch Xcode: Open Xcode application on your Mac. You can locate it
within the Applications folder or conveniently search for it using
Spotlight +
 
Create a New Project: To generate a new project, navigate to the Xcode
welcome window and select the “Create a new Xcode project” option.
Alternatively, if you already have Xcode, open with an existing project,
you can access the “New” submenu under “File” and choose “Project”.
 
Choose a Template: Xcode provides several project templates for different
types of apps, such as iOS, macOS, watchOS, and more. Select the
appropriate template for your project. For example, if you are creating an
iOS app, choose the “App” template under the iOS section, as shown in
Figure
 

--- Page 50 ---
 
Figure 1.2: Choose a Template
 
Configure Project Details:
 
On the next screen, you’ll need to provide some information about your
project. This includes the product name, organization identifier, interface
builder, and language. Xcode may present additional options based on the
template you selected. For example, for an iOS app, you can choose the
user interface, storage, and other project-specific settings, as shown in
Figure Configure these options according to your project requirements.
 

--- Page 51 ---
 
Figure 1.3: Configure Project Details
  
Product Name
 
The product name refers to the name of your app as it will appear on the
user’s device. It is typically a recognizable and descriptive name that
represents your app’s purpose or brand. The product name should be
unique to your app and can be customized during the project setup process
in Xcode. This name will be displayed under the app icon on the user’s
home screen and within the App Store. Specific to our case, the app name
would be HelloWorld.
 

--- Page 52 ---
Organization Identifier
 
The Organization Identifier, also known as the Bundle Identifier Prefix, is
a unique string that identifies your organization or team. It is often written
in reverse domain name notation, such as “com.example”. This identifier
helps ensure that each app has a unique identity and can be properly
installed on devices. It is used as a prefix in the Bundle Identifier to create
a unique app identifier.
 
Bundle Identifier
 
The Bundle Identifier is a unique string that identifies your app. It is
generated by combining the Organization Identifier with the Product
Name. The Bundle Identifier is used to uniquely identify your app on a
specific device and within the App Store. It is crucial for app
provisioning, distribution, and updating.
 
Interface
 
You have the option to choose between two interface technologies:
Storyboard or SwiftUI. Storyboard is a visual interface design tool that
allows you to visually layout multiple screens of your app. Storyboard
empowers you to effortlessly drag and drop UI elements onto a canvas,
establish navigation flows, and customize the properties of UI elements. It
offers a graphical representation of screens and their interconnectedness,

--- Page 53 ---
facilitating the design and visualization of your app’s flow. On the other
hand, SwiftUI, a contemporary declarative UI framework pioneered by
Apple, enables you to define your app’s UI using Swift code and
declarative syntax. SwiftUI grants you access to live previews, code
reusability, and an extensive collection of built-in UI components,
enabling the creation of dynamic and responsive interfaces.
 
Language
 
When setting up a project, you have the option to choose between Swift or
Objective-C as the language. Swift is the recommended and preferred
language for new projects. We will use Swift as a language throughout the
book and in the projects ahead. Xcode also offers the capability to
combine Swift and Objective-C within a single project, facilitating
interoperability and seamless integration between the two languages. This
feature proves valuable when transitioning an existing Objective-C project
to Swift or when incorporating third-party libraries implemented in
Objective-C.
 
Storage
 
During project creation, if your app necessitates the utilization of Core
Data as a data storage solution, you have the ability to select it as an
option.
 
Save the Project
 

--- Page 54 ---
Specify the location on your Mac where you want to save the project files.
You can select an existing folder or create a new one. After configuring
the project details, click the “Create” button. Xcode will create the project
structure and files based on the selected template.
 
Start Building Your App
 
Once the project is created, Xcode will open it in the workspace window.
Here, you can see the project navigator, editor area, and other Xcode
tools. The project navigator displays the files and folders associated with
your project, while the editor area allows you to view and modify the
source code, interface files, and assets. With the project set up, you can
begin building your app by adding code, designing the user interface,
configuring project settings, and incorporating any necessary frameworks
or libraries.
 
That’s it! You have successfully created a new project in Xcode and are
now ready to begin iOS app development using the various tools and
features provided by Xcode. Now let’s explore the different components
provided by Xcode IDE.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 55 ---
 
Introduction to Xcode IDE
 
Xcode is the integrated development environment (IDE) provided by
Apple for developing apps for iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS. It offers
a comprehensive set of tools, editors, and utilities to streamline the app
development process. Here are some key features of Xcode:
  
Project Navigator
 
Project Navigator in Xcode provides an organized and hierarchical view
of your project’s files and resources. It allows you to navigate, manage,
and configure your project’s structure, making it easier to work with
different files, groups, and image assets in your iOS app development
workflow.
 
Code Editor
 
Xcode provides a powerful code editor with features like syntax
highlighting, code completion, and smart suggestions. It supports multiple
programming languages, including Swift and Objective-C, and offers
advanced code navigation and refactoring capabilities. When you click
any swift extension file from project navigator, you can see the code
editor will open up, as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 56 ---
 
Figure 1.4: Xcode Interface
 
Interface Builder
 
Xcode includes Interface Builder, a visual editor for designing user
interfaces using Apple’s UIKit or SwiftUI frameworks. It allows you to
create UI elements, arrange them on the screen, define constraints, and set
up interactions using a drag-and-drop interface. This is the place where we
will define all the UI for the screen. You can open the interface builder
when you click the Main.storyboard file from the project navigator, as
shown in Figure
 

--- Page 57 ---
 
Figure 1.5: Interface Builder
 
Simulator
 
Xcode comes with an iOS Simulator that allows you to test your app on
virtual iOS devices without the need for physical devices. The simulator
lets you preview and interact with your app’s user interface, test different
screen sizes, device orientations, and simulate various system conditions.
Xcode can have simulators for different iOS versions as well. Xcode 15
comes with iOS 17 simulator. Whereas Xcode 16 will come with iOS 18
as the default simulator, you will need a minimum of macOS Sonoma
14.5 to use it. Certain functionalities cannot be replicated in simulations
and may necessitate the use of a physical iOS device, such as utilizing the
camera or accelerometer sensors.
 
Debugger

--- Page 58 ---
 
Xcode features a powerful debugger that helps you find and fix issues in
your code. It allows you to set breakpoints, inspect variables, step through
code execution, and analyze crash reports. The debugger assists in
identifying and resolving bugs and optimizing app performance. Xcode
includes a debugging console (Debug Area in Figure where you can enter
commands and evaluate expressions. This allows you to perform on-the-
fly calculations, print debugging messages, and interact with your app
during debugging sessions. The debugger can help identify memory-
related issues, such as memory leaks or dangling pointers.
 
Instruments
 
Xcode includes Instruments, a suite of performance analysis tools. It helps
you profile your app’s memory usage, CPU performance, and energy
efficiency. It is designed to help developers optimize their app’s
performance, identify memory leaks, and analyze various aspects of their
code’s execution. Instruments allows you to profile your app’s
performance by measuring various metrics, such as CPU usage, memory
allocation, network activity, and energy impact. Instruments provide real-
time data visualization and analysis, enabling you to observe the behavior
of your app during runtime.
 
To access Instruments in Xcode, follow these steps:
  
Open your Xcode project.

--- Page 59 ---
 
Go to the Xcode menu at the top of the screen.
 
Click “Product”.
 
In the “Product” menu, select This will launch Instruments and start
profiling your app.
  
Source Control Integration
 
Xcode integrates with Git, a widely used version control system, allowing
you to manage your app’s source code, track changes, and collaborate
with other developers. Xcode streamlines the management of source code
and facilitates collaboration among developers working on the same
project. It enables efficient version control, history tracking, and conflict
resolution, making it easier to maintain and iterate on codebases.
 
App Distribution and Deployment
 
Xcode provides tools and workflows for packaging, signing, and
distributing your app to the App Store or other deployment methods. It
simplifies the process of creating certificates, provisioning profiles, and
submitting your app for review and distribution. We will look into the
process of app distribution later in the book in Chapter 9: Testing,
Debugging, and
 

--- Page 60 ---
Documentation and Resources
 
Xcode offers extensive documentation, code samples, and resources to
assist developers in learning and implementing various iOS technologies.
It provides access to Apple’s developer documentation, API references,
and community resources.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 61 ---
 
Architecture Patterns
 
In iOS development, an architecture pattern refers to a structural
design that provides guidelines and best practices for organizing and
managing code. It helps separate concerns, improve maintainability,
and enhance the overall structure of the app. It promotes code
cleanliness and emphasizes the reuse of solutions by offering a set of
techniques to address specific problems encountered by developers.
Following are some commonly employed design patterns in iOS
development:
  
Model-View-Controller
 
Model-View-ViewModel
 
View-Interactor-Presenter-Entity-Router
 
Singleton
 
Delegate and Protocol
 
Observer and Notification

--- Page 62 ---
 
We will be using some of the design patterns in the later chapters
where we will look into creating some real time apps. We will also
focus on MVC and MVVM as a design pattern in this book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 63 ---
 
MVC: Model-View-Controller
 
The Model-View-Controller (MVC) design pattern is a widely used
architecture pattern in iOS development. It provides a structured approach
to separating the concerns of an application, improving code organization
and maintainability.
 
 
Figure 1.6: MVC Pattern
  

--- Page 64 ---
Model: The Model component in the MVC architecture represents the
underlying data storage and business logic of the application. It
encompasses data structures, manages data persistence, and implements
the essential functionalities that drive the app.
 
View: The View represents the user interface (UI) components of the
application. It presents data to the user and captures user interactions.
Views are typically implemented using UIKit or SwiftUI frameworks.
 
Controller: The Controller acts as a mediator between the Model and the
View in the MVC architecture. It takes in user input and actions from the
View, interacts with the Model to execute required operations, and ensures
that the View reflects the updated state accordingly. Controllers are
responsible for managing events, handling user interface logic, and
facilitating seamless communication between the Model and the View.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 65 ---
 
MVVM: Model-View-ViewModel
 
The Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) design pattern is another popular
architecture pattern in iOS development. We will be looking into detailed
implementation of this pattern in upcoming chapters.
 
 
Figure 1.7: The MVVM Pattern
  
Model: In the MVVM design pattern in iOS, the Model component
represents the data and business logic of the application. It encapsulates

--- Page 66 ---
data structures, manages data retrieval and manipulation operations, and
implements the core functionalities. It is important to note that the Model
is generally independent and unaware of the View or ViewModel,
focusing solely on its responsibilities within the application’s logic and
data management.
 
View: The View represents the user interface (UI) components of the
application. It is responsible for displaying data to the user and capturing
user interactions. In MVVM, the View is passive and does not contain any
business logic. Views are implemented using UIKit or SwiftUI
frameworks. It binds to properties exposed by the ViewModel to update
the UI and communicates user actions back to the ViewModel.
 
ViewModel: The ViewModel acts as an intermediary between the Model
and the View. It contains the presentation logic, exposes data and
commands that the View needs, and handles user interactions. The
ViewModel retrieves data from the Model, transforms it into a format
suitable for the View, and notifies the View of any changes. It also
processes user input and updates the Model accordingly.
 
Choosing between MVC and MVVM in iOS depends on several factors,
including the project requirements, team preferences, and the complexity
of the application. Here are some considerations to help you make a
decision:
 
MVC (Model-View-Controller):
  

--- Page 67 ---
Suitable for simpler applications with less complex user interfaces.
 
Offers a straightforward and widely adopted architecture pattern.
 
Well-suited for rapid development and smaller projects.
 
Provides a clear separation between data (Model), UI (View), and user
interaction (Controller).
 
Can result in Massive View Controller (MVC) issues if not carefully
managed.
 
MVVM (Model-View-ViewModel):
  
Suitable for more complex applications with dynamic user interfaces.
 
Enables better separation of concerns and testability.
 
Facilitates data binding, allowing automatic updates of the UI when the
underlying data changes.
 
Provides a clear separation between data (Model), UI (View), and
presentation logic (ViewModel).
 
Promotes code reusability and maintainability.

--- Page 68 ---
 
In general, MVVM offers more benefits in terms of testability,
maintainability, and scalability due to its clear separation of concerns and
data binding capabilities. It is a popular choice for larger and more
complex applications. However, if you’re working on a smaller project
with a simple UI, MVC might be a suitable choice.
 
It’s worth noting that there are other architecture patterns available for
iOS development, such as VIPER (View-Interactor-Presenter-Entity-
Router) or Clean Architecture. These patterns may be more suitable for
large-scale projects or complex applications with strict separation of
concerns.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 69 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we were provided with an overview of how iOS apps
work, the development process, and an introduction to the key
concepts related to Xcode setup, project creation, and the Xcode IDE.
We explored the fundamental steps of the development process,
including requirement gathering, analysis, and the importance of
following coding best practices. By emphasizing the significance of
architecture patterns, we highlighted their role in structuring code and
improving the overall organization and maintainability of iOS
applications. Furthermore, we were introduced to Xcode as the
primary development tool for iOS apps, discussing its features,
functionalities, and the benefits it offers to developers. Understanding
the Xcode IDE is crucial for creating efficient and intuitive apps that
meet the needs of iOS users. Lastly, we also explored various
architecture patterns such as MVC and MVVM. With this knowledge
and understanding of iOS app development, we are equipped with the
essential foundations to start on a journey of creating innovative and
successful iOS applications.
 
In the next chapter, we will explore the basics structure of an iOS
application. We will also learn the basics of User Interface design and
layout.

--- Page 70 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 71 ---
CHAPTER 2
 
Getting Started with iOS App Development
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 72 ---
 
Introduction
 
Developing an iOS app requires the integration of several essential
components to deliver a smooth and captivating user experience.
Among the core elements of iOS app development is the creation of an
intuitive and visually appealing user interface. In this chapter, we will
examine the fundamental structure of an iOS app, explore principles
related to user interface design and layout, understand the significance
of utilizing storyboards, dive into understanding the lifecycle of and
lastly, gain insights into implementing navigation within our app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 73 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Structure of an iOS App
 
ViewController Lifecycle
 
Introduction to Storyboard
 
Design Using Storyboard
 
Layouts
 
Programmatic User Interface
 
Storyboard User Interface
 
Navigation in iOS
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 74 ---
 
Structure of an iOS App
 
In the previous chapter, we explored various architecture patterns used in
iOS app development. Now, let us look into the structure of an iOS app
and focus on the widely adopted Model-View-Controller (MVC)
architecture pattern. An iOS app is typically organized around the MVC
pattern, where M stands for Model, V for View, and C for Controller. We
will closely examine how the MVC pattern is employed to design iOS
applications. To proceed, let us revisit the project we created in our
previous chapter, named “HelloWorld”.
 
With reference to Figure 2.1 you can see the project structure on the left-
hand side. We will focus on exploring each file, its significance and usage.
 


--- Page 75 ---
 
Figure 2.1: Project Structure
 
AppDelegate is the most essential part of an iOS app. It is a crucial
component in the app lifecycle. It handles important system-level events,
such as app launches, termination, and background transitions.
 
The primary functions of the AppDelegate class include:
  
Handling app lifecycle events: The AppDelegate handles important
system events for the app’s lifecycle, like app launch, termination, going
to the background, and coming back to the foreground. Developers can
use specific methods in the AppDelegate to respond accordingly, such as
saving data when the app is in the background or updating the user
interface when the app becomes active again.
  
App lifecycle configuration: One of the key tasks of the AppDelegate is to
handle the app’s lifecycle events, such as app launch and termination.
During the app launch process, the AppDelegate is the first object that
receives messages from the system. This allows developers to perform
necessary setup tasks and establish the initial state of the app. In you can
customize the app’s behavior and appearance by implementing specific
methods for various lifecycle events. For instance:
  
application(_:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:): This method is called
when the app finishes launching. Here, you can perform any essential

--- Page 76 ---
configurations, such as setting up the app’s root view controller,
initializing data structures, and configuring third-party libraries.
 
This method is called when the app is about to enter the foreground,
typically from the background state. It allows you to refresh the app’s user
interface or perform any necessary actions before the app becomes active
again.
 
This method is called when the app enters the background state. You can
use this opportunity to save any unsaved data, clean up resources, or
suspend any tasks that are not required while the app is in the background.
 
This method is called when the app is about to terminate. You can use it to
perform any final cleanup tasks, save important data, or release any
resources that the app is using.
  
Managing remote AppDelegate class can handle remote notifications,
commonly known as push notifications. Push notifications are messages
sent from a remote server to the user’s device, even when the app is not
actively running. They are a powerful way to engage users, provide
updates, and notify them of important events or new content. When a push
notification is received, the system delivers it to the app’s delegate,
specifically to the method called This method is triggered when the app is
either in the foreground or the background, and it allows developers to
respond to incoming notifications.

--- Page 77 ---
 
Handling universal class can handle universal links, a powerful feature
introduced in iOS 9. Universal links allow your app to be associated with
specific website URLs, enabling seamless integration between your app
and the web. When a user clicks a universal link on a website or in
another app, the system can open your app directly to display the relevant
content, bypassing the need to open Safari or prompt the user with an
option to choose between your app and the website.
 
Core data stack handling: If your iOS app utilizes Core Data for data
persistence, the AppDelegate class may play a significant role in setting
up and managing the Core Data stack. Core Data is a powerful framework
provided by Apple for managing the model layer objects in your app and
handling data storage. By implementing Core Data stack handling in the
you can centralize and organize the Core Data setup code. This approach
provides a clean and efficient way to manage Core Data, ensuring that
data is efficiently stored and managed throughout the app’s lifecycle.
 
With the release of iOS 13, Apple introduced the SceneDelegate to
enhance the support for multiple windows and scenes in iPadOS and iOS
apps. The SceneDelegate takes on some of the responsibilities that were
previously managed by the AppDelegate but is specifically focused on
managing scenes and multi-window environments. Before iOS 13, the
AppDelegate was solely responsible for initializing the app’s window and
other app-level configurations. However, with the introduction of the the
AppDelegate no longer handles the window initialization for each scene.
Instead, each scene has its own UIWindow instance, which allows for

--- Page 78 ---
better organization and management of the user interface in a multi-
window environment. If you are targeting iOS 13 and later or building
iPadOS apps, they will work with both the AppDelegate and the The
AppDelegate still manages the overall app lifecycle and handles tasks
unrelated to scenes. However, for earlier iOS versions or apps designed
for single-window experiences, you will primarily focus on using
AppDelegate to handle all app-level configurations.
 
In iOS app development, ViewControllers are essential components that
take care of how individual screens or views appear and behave in the
app. They act as mediators between the data (Model) and the user
interface (View). When users interact with the app, the ViewControllers
handle these actions and ensure that the user interface reflects the most
up-to-date information from the data. They bring together the data and the
visual elements, making the app responsive and user-friendly. Some of the
important significance of ViewController with respect to the MVC pattern
is as follows:
  
User interface manage the visual part of a specific screen or view in the
app. They decide what elements such as buttons, labels, images, and more
are shown and how they are arranged to create the app’s user interface.
 
User interactions are in charge of dealing with users’ interactions in the
app. They respond to actions like button taps, swipes, and text input,
making sure the appropriate responses or functions are executed.
 

--- Page 79 ---
Data take data from the Model and present it in the View. They fill in the
UI elements with data, ensuring that the app’s content is always up-to-date
and accurately reflects the underlying data.
 
Navigation and manage how users move through the app. They handle
navigation between different screens, showing new ones, and dismissing
existing ones, creating a smooth experience for users.
 
Responding to lifecycle receive important lifecycle events, such as and
Later in this chapter, we will look into the ViewController lifecycle events
in more depth. These events allow the ViewController to perform specific
actions when the screen is about to appear or disappear from the user’s
view.
 
The next file that we will look into is a It is called a storyboard in iOS. A
storyboard is a visual tool in Xcode that allows developers to design and
layout the user interface of an iOS app. It provides a graphical
representation of the app’s screens and the navigation flow between them.
With storyboards, you can visually design the app’s user interface, add
and arrange UI elements, and connect them to the corresponding code for
functionality. Storyboards simplify the process of building user interfaces,
making app development more efficient and intuitive. In the upcoming
sections of this chapter, we will explore how to design the screen layout
using a storyboard.
 
The “Assets” folder is a directory within an Xcode project that is used to
organize and store various types of multimedia resources and assets.

--- Page 80 ---
These assets are typically used in the app’s user interface, such as images,
icons, launch screens, and more. Additionally, the assets folder can be
utilized to organize and store the color palette for your app. By organizing
resources in the Assets folder, developers can easily access and use them
throughout the app’s code, making the development process more
streamlined and manageable. Additionally, assets stored in the Assets
folder are optimized during the app’s build process, leading to better
performance and reduced app size.
 
In iOS development, a LaunchScreen file, also known as the
LaunchScreen storyboard is a special file used to display a static image or
a simple interface while the app is launching. It is the first thing users see
when they launch the app, and it appears almost instantly during the app
startup process. Before the introduction of the LaunchScreen storyboard,
developers used to create static launch images of specific sizes for
different iOS devices. However, with the introduction of the
LaunchScreen file, developers can now use a single storyboard file that
adapts to different screen sizes and device orientations automatically. This
file allows developers to design a simple user interface for the launch
screen using elements like labels, images, and constraints to ensure it
scales appropriately across various iOS devices.
 
The “Info.plist” file is a critical configuration file that contains essential
information about the app and its settings. The Info.plist file is
automatically generated when you create a new Xcode project. You can
modify the Info.plist file manually or use the graphical interface provided
by Xcode to update its properties. This file holds various configuration
settings and metadata for the app. This includes the app’s bundle

--- Page 81 ---
identifier, version number, build number, and supported device
orientations. It also specifies the permissions required by the app to access
specific device features, such as camera, location services, and so on. It is
crucial to keep the Info.plist file accurate and up-to-date, as it contains
essential information used by the iOS system to manage and interact with
the app.
 
We will be using all these files as we proceed in creating the real-world
application in the next chapters.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 82 ---
 
ViewController Lifecycle
 
The lifecycle of a ViewController in iOS refers to the series of events
and methods that take place from the moment the ViewController is
created to the point it is deallocated and removed from memory.
Developers need to understand the ViewController lifecycle as it
provides a structured understanding of how the ViewController
interacts with the app’s underlying architecture and how it manages its
behavior, data, and user interface updates effectively during its
existence. The ViewController lifecycle consists of various stages, and
at each stage, specific methods are called to notify the ViewController
of its state. You can refer Figure 2.2 for an overview of the
ViewController lifecycle and transitions from one state to another.
 

--- Page 83 ---
 
Figure 2.2: View Controller Lifecycle
  
Initialization: This is the first stage in a life when it is created. It
involves allocating memory for the ViewController and initializing its
properties. During this phase, you can set up initial data, load views
from the storyboard or XIB file, and perform other setup tasks needed
for the ViewController to function properly. init(coder:) method is
called when the ViewController is being initialized from a storyboard

--- Page 84 ---
or a XIB file. It allows you to customize the initialization process if
needed. The initialization stage is crucial for ensuring that the
ViewController is properly prepared to handle user interactions and
present the desired content when it transitions to the next stages of its
lifecycle.
 
Load Views: After the ViewController is initialized, the next stage
involves loading its view hierarchy into memory. The view hierarchy
represents the arrangement and structure of user interface elements that
will be displayed on the screen. This hierarchy is created from a
storyboard or a XIB file, which contains the visual representation of
the user interface. loadView() method is responsible for creating the
view hierarchy. You can either create the view programmatically or
load it from a storyboard or XIB file.
 
The viewDidLoad() method is an important lifecycle method in the
ViewController of an iOS app. It is called after the view has been
loaded into memory, but just before the view is presented on the
screen. This method is typically used to perform additional setup tasks
related to the user interface and data.
 
The viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool) is called just before the view
is about to appear on the screen. This method provides an opportunity
to prepare the UI and perform tasks that should take place right before
the view becomes visible to the user.
 

--- Page 85 ---
The viewIsAppearing(_ animated: Bool) method introduced in iOS 17
serves as an intermediary between viewWillAppear and enabling
developers to perform specific actions or animations at the most
optimal moment. This function is aimed at giving developers a
dedicated point for managing tasks precisely when a view begins
transitioning to visibility.
 
The viewDidAppear(_ animated: Bool) method is called after the view
has appeared on the screen and is fully visible to the user. This method
provides an opportunity to perform tasks that should take place as soon
as the view is presented to the user.
 
The viewWillDisappear(_ animated: Bool) is called just before the
view is about to disappear from the screen, typically when the user
navigates to another screen.
 
The viewDidDisappear(_ animated: Bool) is called after the view has
disappeared from the screen. This method can be used to clean up
resources or perform additional tasks.
 
LayoutSubviews: viewWillLayoutSubviews() is called just before the
view layout and its subviews. You can adjust subviews’ frames or
perform layout-related tasks here. viewDidLayoutSubviews() is called
after the view layout its subviews.
 

--- Page 86 ---
MemoryWarning: didReceiveMemoryWarning() is called when the
system issues a memory warning. You can use this method to release
non-essential resources to free up memory and avoid crashes.
 
This method is called when the ViewController is removed from
memory. You can perform final cleanup or release resources before it
is no longer used using this method.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 87 ---
 
Introduction to Storyboard
 
In iOS development, a storyboard is a graphical tool available in
Xcode that enables you to design and arrange the user interface of an
app. With storyboards, you can create and organize the different
screens in a visual and user-friendly way. This approach simplifies the
task of building the user interface, as it offers a centralized way to
represent the app’s flow and navigation.
 
Some key features and advantages of using storyboards in iOS
development include:
  
With storyboards, developers can visually design the user interface by
dragging and dropping UI elements onto the canvas. This makes it
easy to arrange and customize the layout of the screens without writing
extensive code.
 
Storyboards enable the creation of segues, which define the navigation
of the app from one ViewController (screen) to another. Segues can be
set up directly in the storyboard which simplifies the implementation
of screen transitions.
 

--- Page 88 ---
Storyboards support various types of segue actions and transitions,
such as modal presentations, push and pop controllers, and custom
transitions, allowing developers to define how different screens are
presented to the user.
 
Visual storyboard debugger provides a real-time preview of the app’s
user interface, helping you to identify layout issues and view how the
interface adapts to different device sizes.
 
Storyboards enable you to see a live preview of how segues will be
presented during the app’s runtime, making it easier to visualize the
navigation flow.
 
Storyboard can be used to manage complex UI designs. You can use
storyboard references to break down the main storyboard into smaller,
more manageable modules.
 
Overall, storyboards offer a visual and interactive way to design and
organize the app’s user interface, making the development process
more efficient and accessible for developers of all levels.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 89 ---
 
Design Using Storyboard
 
Designing a screen using a storyboard in Xcode is a straightforward
process that allows you to create the user interface of an iOS app visually.
Here is a step-by-step guide on how to design a screen using a storyboard:
  
If your project doesn’t have a storyboard yet, you can create a new one by
clicking “File” in the Xcode menu, and then selecting “New” and Choose
“Storyboard” from the templates and click Give it a name and click If
your project already has a storyboard (named as you can open it by
double-clicking it on the project navigator.
 
At the bottom of the storyboard canvas, you’ll find options to select the
device and orientation for which you want to design the screen. Choose
the desired device from the menu at the bottom as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 90 ---
 
Figure 2.3: Device Orientation
 
If you want to add any element to the existing Viewcontroller or add a
new Drag an object from the Object Library on the right-hand side and
drop it onto the canvas, as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 91 ---
 
Figure 2.4: Add Element
 
With the ViewController selected, you can customize its properties in the
Attributes Inspector on the right. You can set the title, background color,
and other properties (refer Figure
 

--- Page 92 ---
 
Figure 2.5: Attribute Inspector
 
From the Object Library, drag UI elements onto the canvas. Position and
resize the elements as needed. These UI elements are provided by the
UIKit framework and are essential for building intuitive and interactive
iOS apps. You can add the UI elements, as shown in Figure Here are some
of the common UI elements in iOS:
  
Labels: Labels are used to display static text on the screen. They are often
used to provide information, titles, or headings.
 
Buttons: Buttons are interactive elements that users can tap to trigger
actions or perform specific tasks within the app.
 

--- Page 93 ---
TextFields: Textfields allow users to input text, such as usernames,
passwords, or search queries.
 
ImageViews: ImageViews are used to display static images or images
fetched from external sources like web services.
 
TableViews: TableView presents data in a list format, often with multiple
rows, and is commonly used to display lists of data.
 
CollectionViews: Collectionviews are similar to tableviews but provide
more flexible layouts, making them suitable for displaying more complex
data, like grids or custom layouts.
 
Segmented Controls: Segmented controls allow users to choose from
multiple options in a horizontal or vertical segmented layout.
 
Switches: Switches are used to represent binary on/off options, such as
enabling or disabling a feature.
 
Sliders: Sliders allow users to choose a value from a continuous range by
sliding a thumb along a track.
 
ActivityIndicators: ActivityIndicators are used to show that a task is in
progress, such as loading data or processing.
 

--- Page 94 ---
ProgressViews: ProgressViews display the progress of a task, such as
downloading a file or uploading data.
 
Pickers: Pickers provide a selection interface for choosing items from a
list or setting values with a spinning wheel.
 
If your screen is part of a larger navigation flow, you can create segues to
connect it to other Control-drag from a button or other UI element to the
destination ViewController to create a segue, as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 2.6: Create Segue
 

--- Page 95 ---
Configure the segue’s type and give it an identifier in the Attributes
Inspector, as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 2.7: Segue Settings
  
By following these steps, you can efficiently design a screen using a
storyboard in Xcode. The visual layout capabilities and easy-to-use
Interface Builder tools in the storyboard simplify the process of creating
user interfaces for your iOS app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 96 ---
 
Layouts
 
Layout in iOS refers to the process of arranging and positioning user
interface elements (UI elements) on the screen of an iOS app. Proper
layout ensures that the app’s user interface appears visually appealing,
functional, and consistent across different devices and orientations.
There are several methods of achieving layout in iOS, and the most
common ones are:
  
Auto layout: Auto layout is a powerful constraint-based layout system
provided by iOS that allows developers to create flexible and adaptive
user interfaces. With Auto layout, UI elements are defined in relation
to each other and to the containing view. Auto layout ensures that the
UI adapts well to different screen sizes, orientations, and devices.
 
Auto layout in iOS offers various types of constraints that can be used
to define the layout of user interfaces. These constraints allow for
flexible and responsive designs that adapt to different screen sizes,
orientations, and devices. Here are some of the different types of
constraints available in the Auto layout:
  
Position constraints:
  

--- Page 97 ---
Leading constraint: Specifies the distance between the leading edge of
a view and its superview’s leading edge.
 
Trailing constraint: Specifies the distance between the trailing edge of
a view and its superview’s trailing edge.
 
Top constraint: Specifies the distance between the top edge of a view
and its superview’s top edge.
 
Bottom constraint: Specifies the distance between the bottom edge of a
view and its superview’s bottom edge.
 
CenterX constraint: Aligns the horizontal center of a view with the
horizontal center of its superview.
 
CenterY constraint: Aligns the vertical center of a view with the
vertical center of its superview.
 
Size constraints:
  
Width constraint: Sets the width of a view to a specific constant value.
 
Height constraint: Sets the height of a view to a specific constant
value.

--- Page 98 ---
 
Aspect ratio constraint: Maintains the aspect ratio (width to height
ratio) of a view. For example, it can be used to keep an image view’s
aspect ratio constant regardless of its size.
 
Spacing constraints:
  
Horizontal spacing constraint: Specifies the distance between the
leading or trailing edge of one view and the leading or trailing edge of
another view.
 
Vertical spacing constraint: Specifies the distance between the top or
bottom edge of one view and the top or bottom edge of another view.
 
Baseline constraint: Aligns the baselines of two text-based views (for
example, UILabels or UITextFields).
 
Equal width and equal height constraints:
  
Equal width constraint: Makes two views have the same width.
 
Equal height constraint: Makes two views have the same height.
 
Greater than or equal to and less than or equal to constraints:

--- Page 99 ---
  
Greater than or equal to constraint: Sets a minimum value for the
distance between two views or a view and its superview.
 
Less than or equal to constraint: Sets a maximum value for the
distance between two views or a view and its superview.
 
Alignment constraints:
  
Align leading constraint: Aligns the leading edge of one view with the
leading edge of another view.
 
Align trailing constraint: Aligns the trailing edge of one view with the
trailing edge of another view.
 
Align top constraint: Aligns the top edge of one view with the top edge
of another view.
 
Align bottom constraint: Aligns the bottom edge of one view with the
bottom edge of another view.
 
Align centerX constraint: Aligns the horizontal center of one view
with the horizontal center of another view.
 

--- Page 100 ---
Align centerY constraint: Aligns the vertical center of one view with
the vertical center of another view.
  
These are some of the most commonly used constraints in the Auto
layout. By combining and customizing these constraints, you can
create complex and responsive layouts and adapt to various screen
sizes and orientations.
 
Stack views: Stack views are container views that automatically
arrange their subviews in either a horizontal or vertical stack. Stack
views simplify the process of creating layouts by automatically
handling spacing and alignment between UI elements. They are
particularly useful for arranging buttons, labels, and other UI elements
in a flexible and responsive manner. We will see their use as we create
the apps in the coming chapter.
 
Frames and autoresizing masks: Frames and autoresizing masks are
older layout methods that are still used in specific scenarios or for
backward compatibility. Frames are CGRects that define the position
and size of a UI element, while Autoresizing Masks define how the
element should resize when its superview’s size changes. However, the
Auto Layout has largely replaced these methods due to its more
advanced capabilities.
 
Programmatic layout: While Auto Layout is the preferred method for
most iOS layout tasks, you can also create layouts programmatically

--- Page 101 ---
using Swift or Objective-C code. This approach allows for fine-grained
control over UI element positioning and layout behavior, but it may be
more time-consuming and less visually intuitive compared to using
Interface Builder.
 
By effectively utilizing these layout methods, you can create
responsive and visually appealing user interfaces that adapt well to
various device sizes and orientations, providing a seamless user
experience.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 102 ---
 
Programmatic User Interface
 
Creating a programmatic user interface in iOS involves defining and
configuring UI elements using Swift or Objective-C code without
using Interface Builder or storyboards. This approach offers more
control and flexibility in creating UI layouts. Here’s an example of
how to create a simple programmatic UI for a login screen using Swift:
  
In the existing project that we created previously, open the
ViewController.swift file.
 
Add the following code in the viewDidLoad() method:
 
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
 
// Create a UILabel for the title
let titleLabel = UILabel()
titleLabel.text = “Login Screen”
titleLabel.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 24)
titleLabel.textAlignment = .center
titleLabel.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
view.addSubview(titleLabel)

--- Page 103 ---
 
// Create a UITextField for the username
let usernameField = UITextField()
usernameField.placeholder = “Username”
usernameField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
usernameField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
view.addSubview(usernameField)
 
// Create a UITextField for the password
let passwordField = UITextField()
passwordField.placeholder = “Password”
passwordField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
passwordField.isSecureTextEntry = true
passwordField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
view.addSubview(passwordField)
 
// Create a UIButton for the login
let loginButton = UIButton(type: .system)
loginButton.setTitle(“Login”, for: .normal)
loginButton.titleLabel?.font = UIFont.boldSystemFont(ofSize: 18)
loginButton.layer.borderWidth = 1
loginButton.layer.borderColor = UIColor.black.cgColor
loginButton.layer.cornerRadius = 5
loginButton.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
view.addSubview(loginButton)
}

--- Page 104 ---
 
Now let us add Layout Constraints to make the elements appear at the
right position on the screen. Add the following code in
 
NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
titleLabel.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.centerXAnchor),
titleLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.topAnchor, constant:
100),
usernameField.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
titleLabel.bottomAnchor, constant: 20),
usernameField.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.leadingAnchor, constant: 50),
usernameField.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.trailingAnchor,
constant: -50),
passwordField.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
usernameField.bottomAnchor, constant: 20),
passwordField.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.leadingAnchor,
constant: 50),
passwordField.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.trailingAnchor,
constant: -50),
loginButton.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.centerXAnchor),
loginButton.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
passwordField.bottomAnchor, constant: 30),
loginButton.widthAnchor.constraint(equalToConstant: 100)
])
 

--- Page 105 ---
Let us run the app on a simulator and check the magic on the screen.
You should see the screen as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 2.8: Login Screen
  
Congratulations! You have successfully created the first screen of the
app. Additionally, we will also explore how to create the layout using a

--- Page 106 ---
storyboard.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 107 ---
 
Storyboard User Interface
 
If you want to create the layout using a storyboard, follow these steps:
  
Open Main.storyboard
 
Design the Login Screen
 
Drag and drop the following UI elements from the Object Library onto the
  
UILabel for the title
 
UITextField for the username
 
UITextField for the password
 
UIButton for the login button
 
Customize the UI elements
  
Select each UI element and use the Attributes Inspector to customize its
properties (text, font, color, and more).

--- Page 108 ---
 
Add constraints
 
 
Figure 2.9: Add Constraints
 
Align UI Select the label and click the new constraints at the bottom and
set the top constraints and make it horizontally centered by choosing
Horizontally in Container from the bottom menu (refer to Figure 2.9 and
Figure
 

--- Page 109 ---
 
Figure 2.10: Add Constraints
 
In a similar way, lay out both textField to left and right and make them
horizontally centered as well. Also, lay out the button to the center and
add width constraints to it. Also, add the top constraints to the button.
 
Build and run the app on the iOS simulator to check the amazing UI you
just created.
 
That’s it! You have successfully created a simple layout using a
storyboard. By designing your app’s UI visually with storyboards, you can
save time and easily create complex layouts.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 110 ---
 
Navigation in iOS
 
Navigation in iOS refers to the ability to move between different screens
or view controllers within an app. It allows users to navigate through the
app’s content, access various features, and interact with different parts of
the application. iOS provides built-in navigation mechanisms that
developers can use to implement seamless and intuitive navigation
experiences for their users.
 
There are several methods of navigation in iOS, including:
  
is a container view controller that manages a stack of view controllers in a
navigation hierarchy. It is often used to implement hierarchical navigation,
where users can move forward and backwards through a series of view
controllers. The top view controller in the stack is visible on the screen,
and new view controllers can be pushed onto the stack or popped off to go
back. Key features and functionalities of UINavigationController include:
  
The UINavigationController manages a stack of view controllers in a last-
in-first-out (LIFO) manner. New view controllers are pushed onto the
stack, and the topmost one is always visible.
 

--- Page 111 ---
The UINavigationController automatically provides a navigation bar at
the top of the screen, which typically contains a title and navigation
buttons like “Back” or custom buttons. It allows users to navigate back to
the previous screen and provides easy access to hierarchical navigation.
 
To navigate between view controllers, you use the
pushViewController(_:animated:) method to push a new view controller
onto the stack and the popViewController(animated:) method to remove
the topmost view controller from the stack and return to the previous one.
 
You can customize the appearance of the navigation bar, such as changing
the title, adding buttons, or applying custom styles.
 
is another container view controller that displays a tab bar at the bottom of
the screen. Each tab represents a separate view controller, and users can
switch between different view controllers by tapping on the tabs. It is
commonly used to provide a tab-based navigation system for apps with
distinct sections or functionalities.
 
The key features and functionalities of UITabBarController are as follows:
  
UITabBarController automatically provides a tab bar at the bottom of the
screen, which contains multiple tabs or buttons representing different view
controllers. Each tab is associated with a specific view controller.
 

--- Page 112 ---
When the user taps on a tab, the UITabBarController switches the
currently displayed view controller to the one associated with the selected
tab. This provides a convenient and intuitive way for users to navigate
between different sections or functionalities of the app.
 
UITabBarController can manage multiple view controllers
simultaneously. Each tab can be linked to a separate view controller, and
the view controllers can have their own distinct content and functionality.
 
You can customize the appearance of the tab bar, such as changing the tab
icons and titles or applying custom styles.
 
UITabBarController can work in conjunction with other container view
controllers like UINavigationController and This allows you to build
complex and feature-rich user interfaces by combining various navigation
and layout patterns.
 
UITabBarController provides a delegate protocol that allows you to
respond to tab-related events, such as when a tab is selected.
 
To add the you can simply navigate to the storyboard and select multiple
viewcontrollers that you want to add to the tab. Next, select the Embed-In
option on the bottom right toolbar. And select Tab Bar Controller as
shown in Figure
 

--- Page 113 ---
Presentation: Modal presentation is a method of presenting view
controllers modally, which means they appear on top of the current view
controller and require user interaction before returning to the previous
view controller. Modal presentation is useful for presenting temporary or
one-time tasks, such as login screens or alerts. The presented view
controller can be presented using methods like the and it can be dismissed
using methods like
 
Segue: Segue is a visual connection between two view controllers in
Interface Builder. It defines a transition from one view controller to
another. Segues are often used with storyboards to manage navigation
flow between scenes. There are different types of segues, such as show,
show detail, present modally, and more. You can check the process to add
the segue in Figure
 


--- Page 114 ---
 
Figure 2.11: Tab Bar Controller
  
By utilizing these navigation mechanisms, you can create intuitive and
user-friendly iOS apps with smooth and coherent navigation experiences.
Proper navigation enhances the usability and overall user experience,
making the app more engaging and enjoyable to use. We will look at using
all these different navigation styles in the upcoming chapters.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 115 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we explored the fundamental aspects of the structure of
an iOS app. We had a look into the ViewController lifecycle, learning
about the different methods used during this process. Additionally, we
were introduced to storyboards, a powerful visual tool that simplifies
the design and layout of the app’s user interface, enabling us to create
and define ViewControllers in a graphical manner. We also gained an
overview of various layouts and put our knowledge to practice by
designing a small user interface using both storyboard and
programmatic approaches. Lastly, we took a closer look at navigation
in iOS, discovering how to utilize UINavigationController and These
navigation tools facilitate smooth transitions between providing users
with an effortless exploration of different sections and features within
the app. In the upcoming chapter, we will apply all the concepts
discussed in this chapter to create apps.
 
The next chapter will provide an overview of the Swift programming
language and demonstrate how to use it while building intuitive apps.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 116 ---
 
Points to Remember
  
The ViewController lifecycle includes different stages and
understanding the lifecycle is essential for managing behavior and UI
updates.
 
UI elements can be designed in iOS using storyboards or
programmatically. Storyboards provide a visual way to design app
interfaces. Building interfaces programmatically offers full
customization control.
 
Layouts are used to ensure UI elements are positioned correctly on
different device sizes. Auto-layout and constraints are used for
dynamic and responsive designs.
 
iOS provides different navigation techniques such as using
UINavigationController and These navigation tools allow seamless
movement between enhancing user experience.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 117 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
What is the first stage in the lifecycle of a ViewController in iOS?
  
viewWillAppear
 
Initialization
 
viewDidLoad
 
viewDidAppear
 
Which of the following is NOT a common use case for storyboards in
iOS development?
  
Defining app navigation and transitions between screens.
 
Designing and arranging user interface elements.
 
Writing complex algorithms for data processing.
 

--- Page 118 ---
Visualizing the overall structure of an app.
 
What problem does Auto Layout help to solve in iOS app design?
  
Ensuring apps run on Android devices.
 
Adapting UI elements to different device sizes and orientations.
 
Automating the process of coding view controllers.
 
Making apps compatible with older iOS versions.
 
Which of the following container ViewControllers is commonly used
for hierarchical navigation?
  
UIViewController
 
UINavigationController
 
UITabBarController
 
UISplitViewController
 
What is the role of AppDelegate in an iOS app?

--- Page 119 ---
  
It defines the layout and appearance of the user interface.
 
It manages the app’s interactions with external web services.
 
It receives and handles system-level events related to the app’s
lifecycle.
 
It generates animations and visual effects for the app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 120 ---
 
Answers
  
b
 
c
 
b
 
b
 
c
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 121 ---
CHAPTER 3
 
Swift Programming Language Basics
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 122 ---
 
Introduction
 
In the rapidly evolving landscape of software development, Swift has
emerged as a shining star, revolutionizing the way we create
applications for the Apple ecosystem. In this chapter, we will look into
Swift’s features and its advantages over Objective C. We will also look
into the core concepts that make Swift an exceptional programming
language. In the initial sections, we will lay the foundation by
acquainting ourselves with the very basics. We will navigate through
Swift’s syntax, learn about its versatile data types, and understand the
magic of operators that bring our code to life. With a solid
understanding of these fundamentals, you’ll be empowered to write
your own code snippets using Swift. As we progress, we will explore
control flow and decision-making statements, providing us with the
capability to guide our programs through various situations. We will
also look into the functions and explore how Swift’s protocols
empower us to create flexible and scalable designs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 123 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Introduction to Swift
 
Advantages of Swift
 
Swift Versus Objective C
 
Variables, Data Types, and Operators
 
Collection Types
 
Optionals
 
Control Flow and Decision-Making Statements
 
Functions
 
Closures

--- Page 124 ---
 
Protocols and extensions
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 125 ---
 
Introduction to Swift
 
Swift is a robust high-level programming language engineered by
Apple. Seamlessly spanning across all Apple platforms, Swift ushers in
a new era of software development that combines capabilities with
user-friendly learning. Debuting in June 2014, Swift emerged as the
answer to Apple’s prior programming language, Objective-C, which
had remained largely untouched since the early 1980s. The motivation
behind Swift’s inception was to equip developers with a language that
harmonized power with modernity. Primarily intended as a successor
to Objective-C, Swift seamlessly integrates with Apple’s Cocoa and
Cocoa Touch frameworks, streamlining app development. A defining
feature of Swift’s architecture is its capacity to coexist harmoniously
with the Objective-C code that had been cultivated for Apple products
throughout the decades. This trait was essential for a smooth transition
from Objective C to Swift. With the support of an open-source LLVM
compiler framework, Swift made its debut within Xcode in version 6,
released in 2014. Functioning within the framework of Apple’s
platforms, Swift relies on the Objective-C runtime library. This
dynamic environment helps the coexistence of C, Objective-C, C++,
and Swift code within a single program, ensuring a cohesive and
functional experience for developers, regardless of their preferred
programming language. In essence, Swift’s birth marked an important

--- Page 126 ---
moment in programming history, bridging the gap between legacy
code and modern innovation.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 127 ---
 
Advantages of Swift
 
Swift as the chosen programming language guides developers into a
domain of many advantages, which aligns with efficiency, safety, and
innovation. Swift offers multiple benefits that greatly enhance the
development experience. Here, we will look into some of the notable
advantages that Swift offers, which shapes it into an exceptional
language.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 128 ---
 
Syntax and Readability
 
Swift is constructed with a fresh approach to writing code, introducing
a modern syntax that brings both joy to programmers and enhances the
clarity of their work. This syntax acts as a tool that not only facilitates
the process of coding but also contributes to making the code more
understandable. By emphasizing a clean and straightforward structure,
Swift’s design actively promotes the readability of the codebase. This
means that when developers read or work with Swift code, they are
less likely to encounter confusing or ambiguous sections.
 
Furthermore, one of the significant advantages of Swift’s syntax and
design is its ability to significantly reduce the likelihood of errors.
With its carefully crafted rules and intuitive conventions, Swift guides
developers in writing code that adheres to best practices, minimizing
common pitfalls that can lead to bugs and crashes.
 
This simplicity and clarity in Swift’s syntax carry great significance as
projects grow in complexity. As software development projects evolve
and encompass more features, components, and interactions,
maintaining a clear and organized codebase becomes increasingly
important. Swift’s intuitive syntax streamlines the process of
understanding the codebase, making it easier for developers to grasp

--- Page 129 ---
the logic, intent, and structure of the program even as it becomes more
intricate.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 130 ---
 
Safety by Design
 
Swift places a strong emphasis on ensuring the safety and reliability of
your code, and this commitment is evident in the thoughtful features it
offers, such as Optionals and Type Inference. These features act as
protective measures that shield your code from common issues that
can lead to errors and crashes. Swift’s approach to safety isn’t just
about fixing problems after they occur; it’s about preventing issues
from arising in the first place. This dedication to proactive safety
measures underscores Swift’s commitment to enabling developers to
craft code that’s not only efficient but also built on a foundation of
security and reliability.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 131 ---
 
Fast and Efficient
 
Swift’s ability to deliver exceptional performance is a direct result of
its efficient compilation process. This efficiency allows apps to run
quickly and responsively, making Swift an ideal choice for building
powerful and resource-intensive applications that don’t compromise
performance. The compilation process in Swift is designed to optimize
the code’s execution, making sure that the app’s operations are carried
out as quickly as possible. This optimization involves various
techniques that streamline the way the code is processed by the
underlying hardware, resulting in applications that perform
exceptionally well in terms of speed.
 
This high-speed performance has significant implications for app
development, particularly when it comes to resource-intensive tasks.
Swift’s efficiency allows it to handle complex calculations, data
processing, and other demanding operations with remarkable speed.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 132 ---
 
Dynamic Libraries
 
Swift helps make apps smaller and faster with something called
dynamic libraries. These libraries let us avoid repeating the same code
in different parts of the app. Also, we can use the same code in many
projects, which speeds up making changes and updates to our apps.
Imagine you’re building a big building, and you have to use the same
kind of bricks in different parts. Instead of bringing a new set of bricks
each time, you can use the same bricks you used before. This way, you
save time and resources. Similarly, in app development, when you use
the same code in different parts of an app, it can make the app larger
and slower.
 
Here’s where dynamic libraries in Swift come into play. These libraries
can be shared across different parts of an app. So, instead of having the
same code repeated in multiple places, you can have one version of it
in the library. This makes your app smaller because it doesn’t need to
carry around the same code over and over again. These libraries also
have a cool benefit for developers working on multiple projects. Let’s
say you have different apps, and they all need a similar feature. Instead
of rewriting the same code for each app, you can create a dynamic
library with that feature’s code and use it in all your projects. This not

--- Page 133 ---
only saves time but also helps in keeping the code consistent across
different apps.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 134 ---
 
Interactive Playground
 
Swift Playgrounds make a place where you can be creative with code.
It’s a place where you can try out code pieces and see what happens
right away. This special thing helps you come up with new ideas and
lets you quickly try them out before using them in big projects. Swift
Playgrounds provide a safe and exciting space for developers to tinker,
learn, and innovate. It’s a place where creativity flows, and developers
can quickly try out their ideas and see them come to life. This process
of experimentation and learning is not only enjoyable but also leads to
better, more efficient coding practices in larger projects.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 135 ---
 
Interoperability with Objective-C
 
Swift and Objective-C represent two distinct, yet complementary,
languages available to developers. Objective-C has been a
foundational language for many years, instrumental in the creation of
numerous successful applications. It is well-established and familiar to
many developers. Conversely, Swift is a modern language that
introduces advanced features and functionalities.
 
A notable advantage is the interoperability between Swift and
Objective-C. Developers can utilize Swift for new components of an
application while maintaining existing Objective-C code. This
seamless integration allows for the gradual adoption of Swift, enabling
developers to adopt its modern capabilities without needing to
completely rewrite legacy Objective-C code. This coexistence is
particularly beneficial for developers transitioning their legacy app to
Swift, as it allows for a smooth and incremental integration into their
projects.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 136 ---
 
Strong Community and Open-Source
 
When you have a bunch of smart and creative people working
together, amazing things happen. Swift’s open-source community is a
big bunch of passionate developers who are excited about making
Swift better. They share their ideas, expertise, and solutions to
problems. This results in regular updates to Swift that bring new
features, improvements, and fixes to make the language even more
awesome. This collaboration enriches the Swift experience because it’s
not just about the language itself; it’s about the community of people
who contribute their insights and resources.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 137 ---
 
Functional Programming Paradigm
 
Functional programming in Swift helps developers create code that is
well-structured and easy to understand. It encourages breaking down
tasks into smaller, reusable parts. By doing this, the code becomes
cleaner and more manageable. It’s easier to see what each part of the
code does, making it simpler to find and fix any issues that might
come up. This cleanliness also means that when you need to make
changes or add new things, you’re less likely to accidentally mess up
other parts of the code. In the end, this way of writing code in Swift is
like following a set of rules to create something organized and
efficient.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 138 ---
 
Memory Management
 
Swift helps take care of memory so you don’t have to. It uses
Automatic Reference Counting (ARC) which makes coding easier and
lets you concentrate on making your app work better. Because Swift
takes care of memory for you, it simplifies your coding process. You
don’t have to spend time and effort thinking about when to free up
memory or worry about memory-related errors.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 139 ---
 
Support Across Apple Ecosystem
 
Swift is the main programming language for Apple’s gadgets such as
iPhone, Mac, and more. When you make an app with Swift, it can
work on iPhone, Mac, iPad, Apple Watch and even the Apple TV. This
means your app can reach a wide range of people using different
devices. This seamless integration ensures that Swift applications can
cater to a broad spectrum of devices, reflecting the language’s
adaptability and power.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 140 ---
 
Swift Versus Objective C
 
As the dynamic world of iOS app development evolves, two prominent
programming languages, Swift and Objective-C, stand at the forefront,
each offering distinct advantages and characteristics. In this
comparison, we will dissect the features of both languages to help you
make an informed choice for your development journey.
  
Syntax and readability: Swift provides a modern and intuitive syntax,
making code easier to write. It ensures clarity and accessibility,
facilitating the development and maintenance of applications. This
makes coding simpler and reading code a breeze. Whether you’re new
to programming or have experience, Swift’s style is friendly and easy
to understand. When it comes to Objective-C, it’s like using more
words than needed. The way you write code might end up longer and
not as straightforward. Imagine adding extra details to sentences even
when they’re not necessary. This can sometimes make the code look a
bit complex, especially for those who are starting.
 
Safety and memory management: Safety is a big deal in Swift. It uses
techniques like Optionals and Type Inference to stop common
mistakes when writing code. Swift also takes care of memory with

--- Page 141 ---
Automatic Reference Counting (ARC), which helps prevent memory
problems. Although Objective-C is strong, it requires more hands-on
work for memory. ARC is a tool that handles memory in both
Objective-C and Swift without needing developers to do much.
However, there’s a catch – the code doesn’t work with certain APIs,
such as Core Graphics. In that case, developers have to handle memory
themselves, which can be tricky. If not done just right, this can cause
memory leaks or crashes.
 
Performance: When Swift compiles code, it does it in a way that
makes apps run really fast. It’s just as good as, or sometimes even
better than, Objective-C in terms of performance. This means Swift is
great for apps that need a lot of power. Objective-C is also good at
making apps work well, but Swift has a little advantage here. Because
of its modern style and smart ways of doing things, Swift apps can be a
bit faster and more efficient.
 
Interoperability: Swift was built with seamless interoperability with
Objective-C in mind. This allows developers to integrate Swift code
into existing Objective-C projects and vice versa. This bridging
capability enables a gradual migration to Swift.
 
Learning curve: Swift’s way of writing code is easy to understand,
which is great for people who are just starting to learn programming.
It’s like having a clear road that helps beginners get into app-making
faster. Objective-C’s syntax and concepts can be challenging for

--- Page 142 ---
newcomers, particularly if they are not familiar with C-style
languages.
 
Community and resources: Swift’s open-source nature has fostered a
vibrant community, resulting in regular updates, contributions, and
third-party libraries. This collaborative ecosystem provides ample
resources and support. While Objective-C has an established
community, Swift’s community is growing rapidly due to its more
approachable nature.
 
Here’s a comparison table outlining the key differences between Swift
and Objective-C:
 
Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C:

--- Page 143 ---
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C: Objective-C:
 
Table 3.1: Swift Versus Objective C
 
Remember that the choice between Swift and Objective-C depends on
various factors, including project requirements, familiarity with the
language, and the specific goals of your app development.
 
In the next sections, we will take a look at the fundamental concepts
that make Swift such a versatile and dynamic language. This
exploration of basic Swift principles will provide you with a solid
foundation for understanding its core concepts and capabilities. So, let
us look into some of the core concepts and uncover the essentials of
Swift programming.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 144 ---
 
Variables, Data Types, and Operators
 
In Swift, like in many programming languages, “constants” and
“variables” are fundamental concepts used to store and manage data.
These concepts play a crucial role in making your code readable,
maintainable, and adaptable. Let us look into the details of constants
and variables in Swift.
  
Constants: A constant is a value that cannot be changed after it’s been
assigned. In Swift, you can define a constant using the let keyword.
Once a value is assigned to a constant, you cannot modify that value
throughout the rest of your code.
 
let pi = 3.1415
let name = “Adam”
 
Constants are useful when you have values that should remain
consistent throughout your program’s execution. For example,
mathematical constants, including π or fixed configuration values.
 
Variables: A variable, on the other hand, is a value that can change
throughout the course of your program. Variables are declared using

--- Page 145 ---
the var keyword. You can assign a value to a variable and then update
that value as needed.
 
var age = 25
var temperature = 20.5
 
Variables are valuable for storing data that can be altered during
program execution, such as user inputs, calculations, and intermediate
results.
 
Type Annotation and Inference: Swift is a statically typed language,
which means that the type of a constant or variable is known at
compile-time. Swift can often infer the type based on the initial value
you provide, but you can also explicitly specify the type using type
annotation.
 
let number: Int = 42
var price: Double = 9.99
 
Mutability: Constants and variables in Swift can be mutable or
immutable based on whether you use let or Constants are immutable,
meaning their value cannot be changed after assignment. Variables, as
the name suggests, are mutable, so you can modify their values
throughout the program.
 

--- Page 146 ---
let fixedValue = 5 // This value cannot be changed.
var changingValue = 10 // This value can be modified later.
changingValue = 20 // Now the value is updated to 20.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 147 ---
 
Operators
 
Swift provides a wide range of operators for performing various
operations on values, variables, and constants. These operators are
very similar to what you will find in most of the other programming
languages. Here’s an overview of some of the basic operators in Swift:
  
Arithmetic operators:
  
+: Addition
 
-: Subtraction
 
*: Multiplication
 
/: Division
 
%: Remainder (Modulus)
 
let a = 10
let b = 3
let sum = a + b

--- Page 148 ---
let difference = a - b
let product = a * b
let quotient = a / b
let remainder = a % b
 
Compound assignment operators:
  
Addition assignment
 
Subtraction assignment
 
Multiplication assignment
 
Division assignment
 
Remainder assignment
 
var x = 5
x += 3 // x is now 8
x -= 2 // x is now 6
x *= 4 // x is now 24
x /= 3 // x is now 8
x %= 5 // x is now 3
 

--- Page 149 ---
Comparison operators:
  
Equal to
 
Not equal to
 
<: Less than
 
>: Greater than
 
Less than or equal to
 
Greater than or equal to
 
let p = 10
let q = 5
let isEqual = p == q
let isNotEqual = p != q
let isLessThan = p < q
let isGreaterThan = p > q
let isLessThanOrEqual = p <= q
let isGreaterThanOrEqual = p >= q
 
Logical operators:
  

--- Page 150 ---
Logical AND
 
||: Logical OR
 
!: Logical NOT
 
let isTrue = true
let isFalse = false
let andResult = isTrue && isFalse
let orResult = isTrue || isFalse
let notResult = !isTrue
 
Unary operators:
  
-: Unary minus (negation)
 
+: Unary plus (no effect)
 
let number = 5
let negativeNumber = -number
let positiveNumber = +number
 
Range operators:
  

--- Page 151 ---
…: Closed range operator (inclusive)
 
Half-open range operator (up to, but not including)
 
let closedRange = 1…5 // Includes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
let halfOpenRange = 1..<5 // Includes 1, 2, 3, 4
 
These are just some of the basic operators available in Swift. Operators
are essential for performing computations, making decisions, and
manipulating data within your Swift programs. Understanding how to
use these operators effectively is crucial for writing efficient and
expressive code.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 152 ---
 
Collection Types
 
In Swift, collection types are used to store and organize multiple
values. Swift provides three main collection types:
  
Arrays
  
Arrays are ordered collections of elements that can be of the same or
different data types.
 
Elements in an array are accessed using an index, starting from 0.
 
Arrays can dynamically grow or shrink in size as needed.
 
var numbers: [Int] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
var fruits: [String] = [“Apple”, “Banana”, “Orange”]
 
Array methods and properties
 
Swift arrays come with a variety of useful methods and properties such
as:
  

--- Page 153 ---
Returns the number of elements in the array.
 
append(_:): Adds an element to the end of the array.
 
Inserts an element at a specific index.
 
Removes an element at a specific index.
 
Removes the last element.
 
Checks if the array contains a specific element.
 
Checks if the array is empty.
 
var numbers = [1, 2, 3]
numbers.append(4) // Adds 4 to the end
numbers.insert(0, at: 0) // Inserts 0 at the beginning
numbers.remove(at: 2) // Removes the element at index 2
let hasThree = numbers.contains(3) // Checks if array contains 3
 
Sets
  
Sets are unordered collections of unique elements.
 

--- Page 154 ---
Sets are used when you want to ensure uniqueness and don’t care
about the order.
 
Sets don not have indices to access elements; you use the elements
themselves.
 
var uniqueNumbers: Set = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
var uniqueColors: Set = [“Red”, “Green”, “Blue”]
 
Dictionaries
  
Dictionaries are unordered collections of key-value pairs.
 
Each key in a dictionary must be unique, and it is associated with a
value.
 
You access values in a dictionary using their corresponding keys.
 
[Key: Value]
 
var studentGrades: [String: Int] = [“Alice”: 95, “Bob”: 85, “Carol”:
78]
var fruitCalories: [String: Double] = [“Apple”: 52, “Banana”: 105,
“Orange”: 62]
 

--- Page 155 ---
These collection types come with a variety of methods and properties
that allow you to manipulate and work with the data they hold. For
example, you can add and remove elements, perform operations
between collections, iterate through the elements, and more.
 
Example operations:
 
// Arrays
numbers.append(6)
fruits.insert(“Grapes”, at: 1)
let thirdFruit = fruits[2]
 
// Sets
uniqueNumbers.insert(6)
let isContained = uniqueColors.contains(“Red”)
 
// Dictionaries
studentGrades[“David”] = 88
let bobGrade = studentGrades[“Bob”]
studentGrades.removeValue(forKey: “Carol”)
 
It is important to choose the right collection type for your specific use
case. Use arrays when you need an ordered collection, sets when you
need to ensure uniqueness, and dictionaries when you need to associate

--- Page 156 ---
values with keys. Swift’s collection types are versatile tools that
provide efficient and expressive ways to work with data.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 157 ---
 
Optionals
 
Optionals are a powerful feature in Swift that allows you to represent
the presence or absence of a value. They are used to handle situations
where a value might be missing or unknown. In Swift, any data type
can be made optional by appending a ? to its type declaration. An
optional can either contain a value (wrapped), in which case it is
considered “not nil,” or it can be nil, indicating the absence of a value.
This helps prevent runtime errors when dealing with potentially
missing data.
 
Here’s how optionals work:
 
var age: Int? // Declaring an optional Int
age = 25 // Now ‘age’ contains a value
age = nil // Now ‘age’ is set to nil, meaning no value
 
You can use conditionals to check if an optional contains a value or is
nil:
 
if age != nil {
print(“Age is not nil.”)
} else {

--- Page 158 ---
print(“Age is nil.”)
}
 
However, Swift provides a safer and more expressive way to handle
optionals using optional binding:
 
if let unwrappedAge = age {
print(“Age is \(unwrappedAge)”)
} else {
print(“Age is nil.”)
}
 
In this example, unwrappedAge will only have a value if age is not nil.
This prevents accidental use of a nil value and ensures safety.
 
Swift also provides the nil-coalescing operator (??) to provide a default
value for an optional that might be nil:
 
let actualAge = age ?? 0 // If ‘age’ is nil, ‘actualAge’ will be 0
  
Optional chaining is another useful feature that allows you to call
methods, properties, or subscripts on an optional that might be nil
without triggering a runtime error:
let userNameLength = user?.name?.count // If ‘user’ or ‘user.name’ is
nil, ‘userNameLength’ will be nil

--- Page 159 ---
 
Force unwrapping an optional with ! should be used cautiously, as it
can lead to runtime crashes if the optional is nil:
 
let unwrappedAge = age! // Only safe if you’re sure ‘age’ isn’t nil
 
Optionals are crucial for handling uncertain data and ensuring the
safety and reliability of your Swift code. They encourage you to handle
cases where values might be missing, reducing the risk of runtime
errors.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 160 ---
 
Control Flow and Decision-Making Statements
 
Control flow and decision-making statements in Swift are essential for
directing the execution of your code based on specific conditions.
Swift provides several constructs for controlling the flow of your
program, including and repeat-while loops. Let’s explore them:
  
(if, else if, else): Conditional statements allow you to execute code
blocks based on certain conditions. You can use the if statement to
check a condition, and optionally use else if and else to handle
different cases.
 
if temperature > 30 {
print(“It’s hot!”)
} else if temperature < 10 {
print(“It’s cold!”)
} else {
print(“It’s moderate.”)
}
 
Switch statements: The switch statement allows you to test a value
against multiple possible cases and execute code based on the
matching case.

--- Page 161 ---
 
let grade = “B”
switch grade {
case “A”:
print(“Excellent!”)
case “B”:
print(“Good job!”)
case “C”:
print(“Fair.”)
default:
print(“Keep working.”)
}
 
for-in loops: The for-in loop is used to iterate over a sequence, such as
an array, set, or range.
 
let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
for number in numbers {
print(number)
}
 
while loops: The while loop repeatedly executes a block of code as
long as a condition is true.
 
var count = 0

--- Page 162 ---
while count < 10 {
print(count)
count += 1
}
 
repeat-while loops: Similar to the while loop, the repeat-while loop
executes its block of code at least once before checking the condition.
 
var attempts = 0
repeat {
print(“Attempt \(attempts)”)
attempts += 1
} while attempts < 3
 
Control transfer statements: Swift provides control transfer statements
to change the order of execution within loops and conditional blocks.
  
Terminates the current loop or switch statement.
 
Skips the current iteration of a loop.
 
Used in a switch statement to fall through to the next case.
 
Exits a function or closure and returns a value.

--- Page 163 ---
 
Signals the occurrence of an error.
  
These control flow and decision-making constructs are fundamental
for building logic, making decisions, and iterating over data in your
Swift programs. By using these tools effectively, you can create code
that behaves as intended and handles various scenarios gracefully.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 164 ---
 
Functions
 
In iOS development, functions are essential building blocks that allow
you to encapsulate reusable pieces of code. Functions help you
organize your code, promote modularity, and make your codebase
more maintainable. Let’s explore how functions are used in iOS
development:
  
Function declaration: Functions in Swift are declared using the func
keyword, followed by the function name, parameter list, and return
type.
 
func greet(name: String) -> String {
return “Hello, \(name)!”
}
 
Function parameters: Functions can take one or more parameters,
which are values you pass into the function for it to work with.
 
func add(_ a: Int, _ b: Int) -> Int {
return a + b
}
 

--- Page 165 ---
Return values: Functions can also return values using the return
keyword. The return type is specified after the parameter list.
 
func multiply(_ a: Int, _ b: Int) -> Int {
return a * b
}
 
Calling functions: To use a function, you call it by its name and
provide the required arguments.
 
let greeting = greet(name: “Alice”)
let result = add(3, 5)
let product = multiply(2, 4)
 
Function overloading: Swift allows you to define multiple functions
with the same name but different parameter types, also known as
function overloading.
 
func process(_ value: Int) -> Int {
return value * 2
}
func process(_ value: String) -> String {
return “Processed \(value)”
}
 

--- Page 166 ---
Function parameters modifiers: Swift provides various parameter
modifiers including default values, variable parameters, and in-out
parameters.
 
func greetUser(_ name: String, with greeting: String = “Hello”) ->
String {
return “\(greeting), \(name)!”
}
var number = 5
func increment(_ value: inout Int) {
value += 1
}
increment(&number)
 
Functions are an integral part of iOS development. You will use them
to create user interfaces, handle data, interact with APIs, and perform
various operations within your app. Well-designed and modular
functions contribute to clean, readable, and maintainable code, making
your iOS app development process smoother and more efficient.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 167 ---
 
Closures
 
Closures are self-contained blocks of functionality that can be passed
around and used in Swift. They can capture and store references to
variables and constants from the surrounding context in which they are
defined. Closures are similar to functions, but they can be written in a
more concise and flexible way. Closures play a crucial role in many
aspects of Swift programming, including asynchronous programming,
filtering, and more.
 
Here’s an overview of closures in Swift:
 
Closures have a compact syntax that can capture and store references
to variables and constants from the surrounding context in which they
are defined.
 
let simpleClosure = {
print(“This is a simple closure.”)
}
  
Closure parameters and return Closures can take parameters and return
values, just like functions.
 

--- Page 168 ---
let addClosure: (Int, Int) -> Int = { (a, b) in
return a + b
}
let result = addClosure(3, 5)
 
Shorthand argument names: Swift provides shorthand argument names
for closure parameters, denoted by and more.
 
let multiplyClosure: (Int, Int) -> Int = { $0 * $1 }
let product = multiplyClosure(2, 4)
 
Trailing closures: When a closure is the last argument of a function,
you can use trailing closure syntax.
 
func performOperation(_ operation: (Int, Int) -> Int) -> Int {
return operation(5, 3)
}
let result = performOperation { (a, b) in
return a + b
}
 
Capturing values: Closures can capture and store references to
variables and constants from the surrounding context in which they are
defined. This behavior is known as capturing values.
 

--- Page 169 ---
func makeMultiplier(factor: Int) -> (Int) -> Int {
return { number in
return number * factor
}
}
let double = makeMultiplier(factor: 2)
let triple = makeMultiplier(factor: 3)
let result1 = double(5) // 10
let result2 = triple(4) // 12
 
Escaping closures: If a closure is passed as a parameter to a function
and is stored beyond the lifetime of that function, it’s marked as an
“escaping” closure.
 
func performAsyncTask(completion: @escaping () -> Void) {
DispatchQueue.global().async {
// Perform asynchronous task
completion() // Call the completion closure
}
}
 
Closures are used extensively in Swift for a variety of purposes,
including asynchronous programming with completion handlers,
sorting collections using high-order functions, defining custom

--- Page 170 ---
behaviors in methods, and more. Understanding closures and how to
use them effectively is a key skill for Swift developers.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 171 ---
 
Protocols and Extensions
 
Protocols in iOS development is a fundamental concept that allows
you to define a blueprint of methods, properties, and other
requirements that a class or structure must adopt. Protocols provide a
way to define a contract that multiple types can conform to, promoting
consistency and reusability in your codebase. They are crucial for
achieving a high level of abstraction and building modular,
interchangeable components.
 
Here’s how protocols work in iOS development:
  
Defining a protocol: You can define a protocol using the protocol
keyword, followed by the list of required methods and properties.
 
protocol Drawable {
func draw()
var color: UIColor { get set }
}
 
Adopting a protocol: A class, struct, or enum can adopt a protocol by
listing its name after a colon, followed by the protocol’s requirements.
 

--- Page 172 ---
class Circle: Drawable {
var color: UIColor = .blue
func draw() {
// Implementation of drawing a circle
}
}
 
Conforming to multiple protocols: A type can conform to multiple
protocols by separating the protocol names with commas.
 
class Button: Drawable, Tappable {
var color: UIColor = .red
func draw() {
// Implementation of drawing a button
}
func tap() {
// Implementation of tap action
}
}
 
Protocol inheritance: Protocols can inherit from other protocols, which
allows you to build a hierarchy of protocols with shared requirements.
 
protocol Shape: Drawable {
var area: Double { get }
}

--- Page 173 ---
 
Protocol extensions: You can provide default implementations for
protocol methods using protocol extensions. This allows you to offer
default behavior that can be overridden by conforming types.
 
protocol Printable {
func printDetails()
}
extension Printable {
func printDetails() {
print(“No details available.”)
}
}
 
Checking conformance: You can use the is and operators to check if an
instance conforms to a protocol and to cast it to the protocol type.
 
if someInstance is Drawable {
// It conforms to the Drawable protocol
}
if let drawable = someInstance as? Drawable {
drawable.draw()
}
 

--- Page 174 ---
Protocols are a cornerstone of iOS development. They enable you to
define common behavior and requirements that different parts of your
application can adhere to, promoting modular design, code reuse, and
easier testing. By adopting protocols, you can create well-structured
and maintainable iOS apps.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 175 ---
 
Extensions
 
Extensions in iOS development allow you to add new functionality to
existing types, including classes, structs, enums, and protocols, without
modifying their original source code. Extensions provide a way to
organize your code, separate concerns, and add methods, computed
properties, and initializers to types that you don’t control. They are a
powerful tool for enhancing the capabilities of built-in and third-party
types.
 
Here’s how extensions work in iOS development:
  
Basic extension syntax: You define an extension using the extension
keyword followed by the type you want to extend, and then add the
new functionality inside curly braces.
 
extension String {
func capitalizeFirstLetter() -> String {
return prefix(1).uppercased() + dropFirst()
}
}
 

--- Page 176 ---
Adding methods and properties: Extensions can add new instance
methods, type methods, computed properties, and even subscript
implementations to a type.
 
extension Int {
func squared() -> Int {
return self * self
}
var isEven: Bool {
return self % 2 == 0
}
}
 
Initializer extensions: You can also provide custom initializers to types
using extensions.
 
extension UIColor {
convenience init(hex: String) {
// Implementation to create UIColor from hex code
}
}
 
Protocol conformance: Extensions can make types conform to
protocols, even if you don’t have access to the original source code of
the type.

--- Page 177 ---
 
extension Circle: Drawable {
func draw() {
// Implementation of drawing a circle
}
}
 
Organizing code: Extensions allow you to organize your code into
logical blocks of functionality, improving code readability and
maintainability.
 
extension UIViewController {
func showAlert(title: String, message: String) {
// Implementation of showing an alert
}
func hideKeyboard() {
// Implementation of hiding the keyboard
}
}
 
Limitations: Extensions cannot override existing functionality,
including methods, properties, or initializers, of the type they are
extending. They can only add new functionality.
 

--- Page 178 ---
Extensions are a valuable tool for extending the capabilities of existing
types, enhancing the clarity of your code, and promoting modular
design. They are especially useful when working with classes or types
you don’t have direct control over, such as those from third-party
libraries. By using extensions, you can keep your codebase clean and
organized while adding features to your types.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 179 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we uncovered the core pillars of Swift programming.
We looked into its advantages, compared Swift with Objective-C, and
had a walkthrough of the essentials of variables, data types, and
operators. We explored the collections in detail, navigated into the
importance of optionals, and harnessed control flow and decision-
making statements. We also got a detailed understanding of the
functions and closures and mastered the protocols and extension
implementation. Equipped with this knowledge, you are now ready to
seamlessly transition to the next chapter, and start developing some
real-world applications.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 180 ---
 
Points to Remember
 
Variables, data types, and operators:
  
Variables hold data that can constants hold unchanging
 
Swift has a variety of data types, including Int, Double, String, Bool,
and more.
 
Operators like +, -, *, and / perform arithmetic operations.
 
Comparison operators like >, <, ==, != evaluate conditions.
 
Logical operators like &&, ||, ! work with Boolean values.
 
Collection types:
  
Arrays store ordered collections of items of the same type.
 
Dictionaries hold key-value pairs with unique keys.
 

--- Page 181 ---
Sets store unique values in no particular order.
 
Optionals:
  
Optionals indicate the possible absence of a value.
 
An optional can be either “wrapped” (contains a value) or “nil” (no
value).
 
Avoids runtime crashes by handling missing data gracefully.
 
Use “?” to make a type optional, and “!” to forcefully unwrap an
optional.
 
Control flow and decision-making statements:
  
Control flow manages the order of execution in a program.
 
“else and “else” statements make decisions based on conditions.
 
“switch” statements handle multiple possible cases.
 
and “repeat-while” loops control repetitive tasks.

--- Page 182 ---
 
Functions:
  
Functions are blocks of code that perform specific tasks.
 
Parameters allow you to pass data into functions.
 
Functions can return values using the “return” keyword.
 
Closures:
  
Closures are self-contained blocks of code that can be stored and
passed around.
 
Captures values from their surrounding context.
 
Used for tasks like sorting, filtering, and asynchronous programming.
 
Protocols and extensions:
  
Protocols define a blueprint of methods, properties, and requirements.
 
Conforming types implement protocol requirements.
 

--- Page 183 ---
Protocol inheritance creates hierarchies of requirements.
 
Extensions allow adding functionality to existing types, even for types
you don’t own.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 184 ---
 
References
  
Official Swift Programming https://docs.swift.org/swift-
book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 185 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
What is an optional in Swift?
  
A keyword to define custom types
 
A value that can be either true or false
 
A type-safe way to represent a value that might be absent
 
A constant value that cannot be changed
 
Which keyword is used to declare a constant in Swift?
  
const
 
var
 
let
 
constant

--- Page 186 ---
 
What is the purpose of a protocol in Swift?
  
To define a set of UI elements
 
To create user interfaces
 
To handle asynchronous tasks
 
To define a blueprint of methods and properties that a type can
conform to
 
Which Swift control flow statement is used to iterate over a sequence,
such as an array?
  
while loop
 
if statement
 
for-in loop
 
switch statement
 
What does the “guard” statement in Swift primarily help with?

--- Page 187 ---
  
Loop iteration
 
Optionals unwrapping
 
Value assignment
 
Error handling
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 188 ---
 
Answers
  
c
 
c
 
d
 
c
 
b
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 189 ---
CHAPTER 4
 
Building a To-Do List App
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 190 ---
 
Introduction
 
Whether you are a beginner in app development or an experienced
developer looking to expand your skills, creating a To-Do list app is an
excellent way to learn the fundamentals of iOS app development. In
this chapter, you will get hands-on experience to explore key aspects
of app development, including user interface design, data management,
user interaction, and more. By the end of this chapter, you will have a
functional To-Do list app that you can use to keep track of tasks.
 
Throughout this process, you will practically implement all the
concepts that we have so far seen in the previous chapters, such as
Swift programming, UIKit framework, and data management. You will
also learn about user interface components such as table views,
navigation controllers, and alert controllers, which are essential for
creating intuitive and user-friendly apps.
 
But this is not just about building an app, it is about understanding the
concepts and best practices that are commonly used while building the
iOS application.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 191 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Creating User Interface
 
Navigation Setup
 
TableView Setup
 
Introduction to UserDefaults
 
Add DetailsViewController
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 192 ---
 
Creating User Interface
 
We will start by building a to-do list application, and we will initiate a
project creation using Xcode. This project will be compatible with Xcode
15 or newer, and it will have a minimum iOS version requirement of iOS
17. Following are the steps to create the project:
  
Open Xcode.
 
Go to File > New >
 
Select the App template under iOS.
 
Provide a name for your project and choose other options as shown in
Figure
 

--- Page 193 ---
 
Figure 4.1: Create Project
 
Click Create to create your project.
 
Following this, we will proceed with crafting the app’s user interface,
utilizing the storyboard as our design tool. To get started with UI design,
let us navigate to the Main.Storyboard file. You will notice that there is
already a ViewController present in the main storyboard. We will use the
same ViewController as our screen for the To-Do list app. Drag and drop a
Table View onto the ViewController canvas from the Object Library
which is present on the right-hand top corner with the + icon, or you can

--- Page 194 ---
press Shift + Command + Resize it to fill the entire view. We will then set
the autoLayout constraints for the TableView for it to fill the entire screen,
as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 4.2: TableView with AutoLayout
 
Create Outlet: Creating an outlet for a UITableView in your iOS app
involves a few steps using Interface Builder and Swift. Click the

--- Page 195 ---
ViewController that contains the Click the “Assistant Editor” button in the
Xcode toolbar. This will split the Xcode window into two parts, with your
storyboard on one side and the associated Swift file on the other. In the
storyboard, Ctrl+Click (or right-click) on the Drag the UITableView to
your Swift file where you want to create the outlet. A blue line will appear
as you drag. A popover will appear when you release the drag. In the
popover, give your outlet a name (example, tableView) as shown in Figure
Click the Connect button in the popover. This creates the outlet in your
Swift file.
 
 
Figure 4.3: Create Outlet
 
Following this, we will proceed to establish a single cell within the To
achieve this, click on the TableView and navigate to the Attribute

--- Page 196 ---
Inspector tab highlighted in Figure Here, set the Prototype Cells count to
as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 4.4: Set the Prototype Cell
 
We performed this step to enable the design and utilization of this specific
cell. Next, we will assign the Identifier to this cell. To do this, select the
cell, navigate to the Attribute Inspector tab, and set the Identifier to as
shown in Figure
 

--- Page 197 ---
 
Figure 4.5: Set Cell Identifier
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 198 ---
 
Navigation Setup
 
To facilitate screen navigation within our application, we will incorporate
a Navigation Controller. While we have previously discussed the
Navigation Controller concept in Chapter 2, Getting Started with iOS now
it is time to integrate it into our app. Start by selecting the ViewController
on the storyboard canvas. Next, navigate to the Xcode menu bar and
access the Editor menu. Within the Editor menu, you will find the Embed
In option, as shown in Figure Upon selecting it, a submenu will appear,
offering various choices. Opt for the Navigation Controller option.
 

--- Page 199 ---
 
Figure 4.6: Embed ViewController
 

--- Page 200 ---
Alternatively, you can also choose the Embed In option located in the
bottom right corner after selecting the as illustrated in Figure 4.7 and then
select Navigation Following these steps, you will observe that the
Navigation Controller has been added to your storyboard canvas,
effectively embedding the ViewController within it.
 
 
Figure 4.7: Add Navigation
 

--- Page 201 ---
Now let us do some Navigation Bar setup. For that, go to your
ViewController.swift file, and we will add navigation bar customization
code to the ViewDidLoad method.
 
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
// Do any additional setup after loading the view.
let appearance = UINavigationBarAppearance()
appearance.configureWithOpaqueBackground()
appearance.backgroundColor = UIColor.lightGray
navigationController?.navigationBar.standardAppearance = appearance
navigationController?.navigationBar.scrollEdgeAppearance = appearance
self.title = “ToDo List”
}
 
With UINavigationBarAppearance, you can define a set of appearance
properties for navigation bars, including attributes such as background
color, title text attributes, button styles, and more. These appearance
settings can be applied globally to all navigation bars in your app or on a
per-navigation controller basis.
 
The code we added to viewDidLoad customizes the navigation bar of the
view controller by giving it an opaque background with a light gray color
and setting the title of the view controller to ToDo List. The customized
appearance is applied both to the standard and scrolled states of the
navigation bar.
 

--- Page 202 ---
Let us also add a navigation button to add the Task to our ToDo list. For
this, we will add the following line in the
 
navigationItem.rightBarButtonItem =
UIBarButtonItem(barButtonSystemItem: .add, target: self, action:
#selector(addList))
 
Here, you are creating a UIBarButtonItem instance using the initializer
that takes three parameters:
  
barButtonSystemItem: It specifies the type of system-provided button
item you want to create. In this case, it is which is a standard system-
provided. The Add button is often used for actions such as adding new
items or creating new entries.
 
target: It specifies the target object, which is usually self in this context. It
means that the action associated with this button will be handled by the
current view controller (the one where this code is located).
 
It specifies the method (or action) that should be called when the button is
tapped. In this case, it is which means that the addList method will be
executed when this button is tapped.
 
After adding the aforementioned code to the line, the ViewDidLoad code
should look like:
 

--- Page 203 ---
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
// Do any additional setup after loading the view.
let appearance = UINavigationBarAppearance()
appearance.configureWithOpaqueBackground()
appearance.backgroundColor = UIColor.lightGray
navigationController?.navigationBar.standardAppearance = appearance
navigationController?.navigationBar.scrollEdgeAppearance = appearance
self.title = “ToDo List”
navigationItem.rightBarButtonItem =
UIBarButtonItem(barButtonSystemItem: .add, target: self, action:
#selector(addList))
}
 
We will also add the addList method to silence the error you might be
getting for the missing method.
 
@objc func addList() {
print(“Add to list”)
}
 
The @objc attribute is used in Swift to make a function, method, or
property accessible from Objective-C code. In the preceding code snippet,
the @objc attribute is applied to the addList function, indicating that this
function should be available to both Swift and Objective-C code.
 

--- Page 204 ---
When you build and run the app, you will observe a Navigation Bar
displayed on your screen. In the upper-right corner, you will find an Add
button. By clicking this button, you should see Add to List being printed
on the console.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 205 ---
 
TableView Setup
 
We will be using Table View to display the To-Do list. In iOS, the
UITableViewDataSource and UITableViewDelegate protocols are
essential for managing and customizing the behavior and appearance
of a UITableView component. These protocols are often implemented
by a view controller or a dedicated data source and delegate object to
control the content, layout, and interaction with table view cells.
 
The UITableViewDataSource protocol in iOS is a fundamental
protocol used to provide data to a UITableView and is crucial for
populating and managing the content of the table view. It defines
methods and properties that allow you to specify the number of
sections, the number of rows in each section, and the content of
individual cells.
 
Let us apply the UITableViewDataSource protocol to the tableView
within the To do this, we will create an extension of the
ViewController and incorporate the necessary data source methods
into it. Additionally, we will initialize the listArray within the
ViewController to store the To-Do list data. Following is the
TableView outlet that we previously established; add the following
line: var listArray = This array will hold the To-Do list data.

--- Page 206 ---
 
Let us go back to the viewDidLoad method and add a line
self.tableView.dataSource = When you add this line, you are
essentially telling the table view that the current view controller will
provide the data required to populate the table view. This means that
the data source methods required by the UITableViewDataSource
protocol (example, should be implemented in the current view
controller to provide the table view with its data. This connection
between the view controller and the table view’s data source is
essential for populating the table view with content and ensuring that it
displays the data you want to show. Next, we will create
UITableViewDataSource method using an extension:
 
extension ViewController : UITableViewDataSource {
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection
section: Int) -> Int {
return listArray.count
}
 
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath:
IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell {
let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: “Cell”, for:
indexPath)
cell.textLabel?.text = listArray[indexPath.row]
return cell
}

--- Page 207 ---
 
This code begins by extending the ViewController class to conform to
the UITableViewDataSource protocol. This allows you to implement
the required data source methods in this extension.
  
func The method is required by the UITableViewDataSource protocol.
It specifies the number of rows (cells) in a particular section of the
table view.
 
Here, it represents the table view for which you are providing data.
 
It is an integer parameter representing the section number (if your table
view has multiple sections, you can use this parameter to customize
the row count for each section). The method returns the number of
rows, which is determined by the count of elements in the You have
the option to add the func numberOfSections(in tableView:
UITableView) -> Int method, which is optional, to introduce multiple
sections into your table view. By default, the table view will have a
single section.
 
func This method is also required by the UITableViewDataSource
protocol. It is responsible for providing and configuring cells for the
table view.
 
Here, it represents the table view where the cell will be displayed.

--- Page 208 ---
 
indexPath: The object specifying the section and row for which you
are configuring a cell. A reusable cell is obtained using
dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:for:): A resuable cell is obtained
using this method, where Cell is the cell’s identifier that we set in the
storyboard previously. The text label of the cell is set to the
corresponding item from the listArray based on the row index. Finally,
the configured cell is returned.
 
Now that we have the basic setup for the list to display, we need to add
some data to our todo list. For this, let us go back to the addList
method that we previously created and add the following code to it:
 
@objc func addList(){
1. let createTask = UIAlertController(title: “Enter Task”, message: nil,
preferredStyle: .alert)
2.        createTask.addTextField()
3.        let submit = UIAlertAction(title: “Submit”, style: .default) {
[unowned createTask] _ in
4.            if let text = createTask.textFields![0].text {
5.                if(text.count != 0) {
6.                    self.listArray.append(text)
7.                    self.tableView.reloadData()
8.                       }
9.            }
10.        }

--- Page 209 ---
11.        let cancel = UIAlertAction(title: “Cancel”, style: .cancel)
12.        createTask.addAction(submit)
13.        createTask.addAction(cancel)
14.        present(createTask, animated: true)
}
 
Using the aforementioned code, the addList() function creates a user
interface for adding tasks through a UIAlertController with an input
text field.
  
Line Creates an instance of which is a system-provided class used to
display alerts and action sheets. title: Sets the title of the alert to Enter
Task.message: No message is provided (nil). preferredStyle: Specifies
that it’s an alert-style
 
Line This adds a text field to the alert, allowing the user to input text.
 
Line Creates a submit button to add the task, and the closure represents
the action to be performed on the button click.
 
Line It checks if the text is present, and if not empty, in line 6, we add
the text to the listArray using the append function. After that, we
reload the tableview to see the updated data.
 
Line We create a cancel button for the alert.

--- Page 210 ---
 
Line We add the submit and cancel to the alert. Lastly, we will present
the
 
Let us build and run the app, you should see the AlertView when you
click on plus button as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 213 ---
 
Figure 4.8: Create Task
 
And when you add a text to the Textfield and submit, it should appear
on the Let us create a few tasks, and the TableView should look similar
to Figure
 

--- Page 215 ---
 
Figure 4.9: To-Do List
 
If you close and reopen the app, you will observe that all the tasks you
have created disappear, leaving you with an empty This is not the
desired behavior for our app. To address this issue, we need a way to
store our data persistently, and UserDefaults is one of the solutions to
our problem.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 216 ---
 
Introduction to UserDefaults
 
UserDefaults is a data storage mechanism provided by the Foundation
framework that allows us to store small amounts of user data
persistently across apps. It is suitable for storing user preferences,
settings, and small amounts of data such as task lists in our case.
 
Here is how you can use UserDefaults to store and retrieve your to-do
list tasks:
 
When a user adds a task to the list, you can save it to UserDefaults. In
the addList method that we created earlier; we will add the following
code:
 
UserDefaults.standard.set(self.listArray, forKey: “ToDoList”)
UserDefaults.standard.synchronize()
 
UserDefaults.standard provides access to the UserDefaults instance.
And we set the value of listArray for the key “ToDoList”. It is
important to remember this key as we are going to use it to access the
stored value. So now the addList method should look something as
follows:
 

--- Page 217 ---
@objc func addList(){
let createTask = UIAlertController(title: “Enter Task”, message: nil,
preferredStyle: .alert)
createTask.addTextField()
let submit = UIAlertAction(title: “Submit”, style: .default) { [unowned
createTask] _ in
if let text = createTask.textFields![0].text {
if(text.count != 0) {
self.listArray.append(text)
UserDefaults.standard.set(self.listArray, forKey: “ToDoList”)
UserDefaults.standard.synchronize()
self.tableView.reloadData()
}
}
}
let cancel = UIAlertAction(title: “Cancel”, style: .cancel)
createTask.addAction(submit)
createTask.addAction(cancel)
present(createTask, animated: true)
}
}
 
Now, returning to the viewDidLoad method, let us start by fetching the
value associated with the key ToDoList from UserDefaults and
assigning it to the listArray using the following code:
 

--- Page 218 ---
self.listArray = UserDefaults.standard.array(forKey: “ToDoList”) as?
[String] ?? []
 
Now your viewDidLoad Method should look similar to:
 
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
// Do any additional setup after loading the view.
self.listArray = UserDefaults.standard.array(forKey: “ToDoList”) as?
[String] ?? []
self.tableView.dataSource = self
let appearance = UINavigationBarAppearance()
appearance.configureWithOpaqueBackground()
appearance.backgroundColor = UIColor.lightGray
navigationController?.navigationBar.standardAppearance =
appearance
navigationController?.navigationBar.scrollEdgeAppearance =
appearance
self.title = “ToDo List”
navigationItem.rightBarButtonItem =
UIBarButtonItem(barButtonSystemItem: .add, target: self, action:
#selector(addList))
}
 
Now build the app and add a few tasks, and then verify if the data
persists the next time you rebuild the app.

--- Page 219 ---
 
Now that we have seen how to add the task, perform the following
steps if you want to delete some tasks from the list. We will add the
following methods to tableView datasource extension:
 
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, canEditRowAt indexPath:
IndexPath) -> Bool {
return true
}
 
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, commit editingStyle:
UITableViewCell.EditingStyle, forRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) {
if(editingStyle == .delete) {
listArray.remove(at: indexPath.row)
self.tableView.reloadData()
UserDefaults.standard.set(listArray, forKey: “ToDoList”)
UserDefaults.standard.synchronize()
}
}
  
The first method is used to determine whether a specific row (task) in
the table view can be edited, which includes the ability to delete.
 
The second method is called when the user performs an editing action
on a row, such as deleting it. It takes three parameters:

--- Page 220 ---
  
The table view where the editing action occurred.
 
An UITableViewCell.EditingStyle enum value that specifies the type
of editing action (example, delete).
 
An IndexPath object that specifies the section and row of the edited
cell.
  
The code in the second method checks whether the editing style is
indicating that the user wants to delete the row. If the condition is met,
it removes the task from the listArray based on the
 
It then calls self.tableView.reloadData() to refresh the table view and
reflect the updated task list. Finally, it saves the updated listArray back
to UserDefaults using UserDefaults.standard.set(listArray, forKey: and
synchronizes UserDefaults using UserDefaults.standard.synchronize()
to ensure the changes are persisted.
 
Now, let us execute the app and observe its real-time behavior. When
you swipe a cell, you will notice a delete icon, as shown in Figure
Upon tapping the delete button, the corresponding task will be
removed from the list.
 

--- Page 223 ---
 
Figure 4.10: Delete Task
 
As you may recall, we added a navigation controller to the storyboard
in the beginning. Now, let us explore how we can transition from the
task list screen to a new screen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 224 ---
 
Add DetailsViewController
 
Let us go back to the storyboard and add a new ViewController to the it.
Open the Object Library on the right-hand side in the Utilities pane by
clicking the plus icon or by pressing Shift + Command + L. Then, search
for ViewController in the Object Drag and drop it onto the canvas.
 
Next, include a label in the ViewController by accessing the Object
searching for and then dragging and dropping it onto the ViewController
in the storyboard. To center this label on the screen using auto layout,
follow these steps:
  
Select the label you just added.
 
Locate and click on the Align icon situated in the bottom corner.
 
Align the label both horizontally and vertically, as illustrated in Figure
 

--- Page 225 ---
 
Figure 4.11: Align Label
 
Click on Add 2 which will effectively position the label in the center of
the screen.
 
Now, we need to create a Swift file for this Right-click (or Control-click)
on your project’s root directory. From the context menu, select New In the
dialog that appears, select Cocoa Touch Class from the list of templates
and click Give it a name, and make sure the subclass selected is

--- Page 226 ---
UIViewController and the language is Swift. Click next and create to save
the file.
 
Let us navigate back to select a new ViewController on the canvas, go to
Identity Inspector on the right-hand side, and add the class name,
DetailsViewController and Storyboard ID detailVC as shown in Figure
We will be using this ID later in the code to navigate.
 
 
Figure 4.12: CreateDetailsViewController
 
Next, we will create an outlet for the label following the same process that
we previously followed on tableView in Figure Select the label, and
ensure that you drag the outlet to the DetailsViewController file, which

--- Page 227 ---
should be open in the assistant editor on the right-hand side. Name this
outlet as
 
Let us navigate to the DetailsViewController.swift file and add a string
below the outlet we created: var titleText = “”. We will be using this string
later to pass the data to the Next, in the viewDidLoad method on we will
add the following code:
 
self.titleLabel.text = titleText
 
This code is responsible for defining the text that appears on the label we
placed on the storyboard. To proceed, return to the ViewController.swift
file and incorporate a delegate method that enables navigation to the To do
this, first, navigate to the viewDidLoad function in the
ViewController.swift file and include the line self.tableView.delegate = as
we did earlier for the data source. You might encounter an error, but no
need to worry, we will address it.
 
Let us add the delegate extension using the following code at the end of
the
1. extension ViewController : UITableViewDelegate {
2.     func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, didSelectRowAt
indexPath: IndexPath) {
3.         let vc = self.storyboard?.instantiateViewController(identifier:
“detailVC”) as! DetailsViewController
4.         vc.titleText = self.listArray[indexPath.row]
5.         self.navigationController?.pushViewController(vc, animated: true)
6.     }

--- Page 228 ---
7. }
 
This code is implementing the UITableViewDelegate protocol in an
extension of the ViewController class. It specifically deals with the action
that should occur when a UITableViewCell is selected. Let us go through
it step by step:
  
Line This is a delegate method from the UITableViewDelegate protocol,
and it gets called when a user taps on a cell in the table view. It provides
information about which cell was selected through the indexPath
parameter.
 
Line It creates an instance of The breakdown of this code is as follows:
  
It is a reference to the storyboard containing your view controllers.
 
.instantiateViewController(identifier: “detailVC”): This method tries to
instantiate a view controller from the storyboard with the identifier
“detailVC”, which we added previously as The result of
instantiateViewController is cast to a
 
Line It assigns a value to a property called titleText in the We access the
selected task value from listArray using the
 
Line It is used to push the DetailsViewController onto the navigation
stack. Here is a breakdown of this command:

--- Page 229 ---
  
self.navigationController is a reference to the navigation controller that
manages the navigation flow.
 
pushViewController(vc, animated: true) method is used to navigate to the
It pushes the vc (which is an instance of onto the navigation stack, making
it the new top view controller. The animated parameter specifies whether
the transition should be animated.
  
Now, after building and running the app, if you click on any of the tasks in
the list, it will open a new screen where you will see the name of the
selected task displayed, as illustrated in Figure
 

--- Page 231 ---
 
Figure 4.13: DetailsViewController
 
We have established a simple workflow for the to-do list app. There is
ample room for creativity, allowing you to enhance the app’s functionality.
Consider options such as including additional task details or incorporating
task-specific date and time information.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 232 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we started by creating a straightforward yet functional
To-Do List app. We explored the fundamental concepts of tableView
DataSource and gaining proficiency in efficiently populating and
interacting with a Additionally, we looked into creating a navigation
controller to facilitate seamless navigation across different screens
within our app’s interface. Our exploration of UserDefaults revealed
its utility in persistently storing and retrieving user data, ensuring the
preservation of tasks even after the app restarts. We also implemented
the capability to delete tasks from our to-do list, enhancing the user
experience and enabling effective task management.
 
Furthermore, we explored screen navigation and data passing,
allowing users to access task details in a dedicated Through the
development of this To-Do List app and our coverage of these
fundamental concepts, we have taken substantial strides in
comprehending iOS app development. This knowledge provides a
strong foundation for crafting more intricate and feature-rich
applications in the future. In the upcoming chapter, we will explore the
practical implementation of another iOS data persistence method
known as Swift Data, expanding our understanding of the various
options available.

--- Page 233 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 234 ---
 
References
  
 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/uikit/uinavigationcontrolle
r
 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/userdefaults
 
Please refer for the complete https://github.com/ava-orange-
education/iOS-App-Development-Projects-Handbook
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 235 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
In an iOS app, the DataSource is responsible for:
  
Defining the appearance of UI elements
 
Providing data and controlling the content of UI elements like
UITableView
 
Handling user actions and gestures
 
Managing the navigation stack
 
In iOS, what is the primary role of a Delegate?
  
Supplying data to UI elements
 
Handling user interactions and input
 
Managing app navigation
 

--- Page 236 ---
Defining the layout of UI elements
 
What does the UITableViewDelegate method
tableView(_:didSelectRowAt:) typically handled?
  
Defining the appearance of selected cells
 
Populating data in the table view
 
Responding to a cell selection event
 
Deleting rows from the table view
 
In data is stored as:
  
JSON files
 
Binary data
 
Key-value pairs
 
Encrypted data
 
What is UserDefaults primarily used for in iOS development?

--- Page 237 ---
  
Storing large amounts of data
 
Managing user interface layout
 
Persistently storing small amounts of user data
 
Handling network requests
 
Which component is used for managing the navigation stack in iOS?
  
UITableViewController
 
UINavigationBar
 
UIViewController
 
UINavigationController
 
In iOS, how can you push a view controller onto the navigation stack?
  
By using a tab bar controller
 

--- Page 238 ---
By presenting it modally
 
By using the pushViewController(_:animated:) method
 
By embedding it in a container view controller
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 239 ---
 
Answers
  
b
 
b
 
c
 
c
 
c
 
d
 
c
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 240 ---
CHAPTER 5
 
Developing a Weather App
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 241 ---
 
Introduction
 
In this chapter, we will explore some fundamental concepts that are
crucial for building a weather forecast app. We will start by exploring
how to get a user’s current location using Core Location. This allows
us to pinpoint exactly where someone is located, which is crucial for
creating apps that can offer location-based services, such as weather
conditions for your area. Next, we will look into the world of API
network requests, learning how to fetch real-time data from external
sources. We will also cover the topic of JSON parsing, which is a way
to organize data in a structured format. This skill is very handy for
making sense of the information you get from sources such as weather
APIs. But here is the exciting part: we would not just stop at theory. As
we gain a firm understanding of these core concepts, we will apply
them in practice by creating a simple and practical weather forecast
app. This hands-on experience will give you the knowledge you need
to craft your own robust weather application. Get ready to explore
these essential concepts and kickstart your journey to crafting your
very own weather app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 242 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Introduction to Core Location
 
Get Current User Location
 
UI Setup for Weather App
 
Setup App Icon and Launch Screen
 
Web Service Integration and JSON Parsing
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 243 ---
 
Introduction to Core Location
 
Core Location is a framework provided by Apple that is used to access
location-related services on Apple devices. Core Location enables
applications to determine the device’s geographic location, altitude,
and orientation. It makes use of various hardware components,
including GPS, Wi-Fi, and cellular, to provide accurate location data.
 
Core Location provides a versatile set of functions, including:
  
Location Data Retrieval: It helps apps to fetch the device’s latitude and
longitude, facilitating the creation of location-based features such as
maps, navigation, and personalized location-based suggestions, like in
the case of a weather app.
 
Geofencing: Core Location allows the establishment of virtual
geofences around real-world areas. When the device enters or exits
these predefined areas, the app can respond with specific actions, such
as sending notifications, for example, in the case of iBeacons.
 
Privacy Control: Core Location prioritizes user privacy by requiring
explicit permission for location access. Apple has integrated privacy
measures to safeguard sensitive location data. If your app wants to

--- Page 244 ---
access users’ location, you need to ask for permission before you get
access.
 
Location Monitoring: Core Location can intelligently track substantial
changes in the device’s location, helping to conserve power while still
delivering location-based services.
 
Region Monitoring for Geolocation: It supports the monitoring of
geographical regions. You can use Core Location for monitoring
geographical regions and triggering events when the device enters or
exits those regions.
 
We will be highlighting specific classes within the Core Location
framework that are essential for obtaining the user’s current location.
 
CLLocationManager is a fundamental class that serves as the primary
interface for managing location-related services and obtaining
geographic information from a device. CLLocationManager is
responsible for initiating and controlling location updates, managing
permissions, and delivering location data to your app.
 
CLLocation is a class in the Core Location framework. It’s used to
represent geographic coordinates (latitude and longitude) along with
altitude and timestamp information. CLLocation objects are commonly
used for tasks such as determining a device’s current location,

--- Page 245 ---
calculating distances between two points, and working with
geographic data. We will be using it in real time in our weather app to
see the live implementation.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 246 ---
 
Get Current User Location
 
To begin, let us initiate a new project in Xcode. We will name this project
“WeatherApp”. If you require instructions for setting up a project in
Xcode, you can refer to our earlier chapter. The project creation interface
should resemble the one depicted in Figure
 
 
Figure 5.1: Project setup

--- Page 247 ---
 
Now, let us configure the setup to obtain the user’s current location. To
start, we will navigate to the project directory, create a folder named and
introduce a Swift file within it, which we will name The steps to add a
folder and a file are as follows:
  
Right-click (or Control-click) the project folder, then select “New Group”
from the context menu. A new group will appear, and its name will be
highlighted for editing. Type the name as Manager for your group and
press
 
To add files to the newly created group, right-click (or Control-click) the
group, then select “New File” and select Swift File and name it You can
also use “File” > “New File” from the menu option.
 
After following these steps, the project directory should look as shown in
Figure
 

--- Page 248 ---
 
Figure 5.2: Group setup
 

--- Page 249 ---
Now, let us navigate to the LocationManager file and initiate the process
of adding code to retrieve the user’s current location. To begin, at the top
of the file, we will include the line import CoreLocation to import the
Core Location framework, which is essential for accessing the location-
related classes we will be using. Add the following code to
 
1. class LocationManager: NSObject {
2.     let manager = CLLocationManager()
3.     var location: CLLocationCoordinate2D?
4.     override init() {
5.         super.init()
6.         manager.delegate = self
7.     }
8. }
  
Line It declares a class named It inherits from
 
Line It creates an instance of CLLocationManager named This instance is
used to manage and control location services and retrieve the user’s
location.
 
Line It declares a variable named location of type is a structure that
represents a geographic coordinate (latitude and longitude). It is used to
store the user’s current location.
 
Line This marks the beginning of the class’s initializer method. The init()
method is called when an instance of the LocationManager class is

--- Page 250 ---
created.
 
Line super.init() calls the designated initializer of the superclass
(NSObject). It ensures that the necessary setup is performed before
custom initialization.
 
Line It sets the delegate property of the manager to self, which means that
the LocationManager class will handle location manager delegate
methods. By conforming to the CLLocationManagerDelegate protocol,
this class will be equipped to respond to various location-related events
and updates.
 
Next, we will request for users Authorization permission to access the
location using the following code:
 
func requestLocation() {
manager.requestWhenInUseAuthorization()
}
 
Here we create a custom method called which we will be using later to
authorize the user. Within the function, we call the
requestWhenInUseAuthorization() method of the manager instance. This
method is used to request user authorization to access users’ location data
when the app is in the foreground and actively in use.
 

--- Page 251 ---
Next, we will add an extension to this class to conform to
CLLocationManagerDelegate methods as follows:
 
1. extension LocationManager : CLLocationManagerDelegate {
2.     func locationManagerDidChangeAuthorization(_ manager:
CLLocationManager) {
3.         switch manager.authorizationStatus {
4.         case .notDetermined:
5.             print(“When user did not yet determined”)
6.         case .restricted:
7.             print(“Restricted by parental control”)
8.         case .denied:
9.             print(“When user select option Dont’t Allow”)
10.         case .authorizedWhenInUse:
11.             print(“When user select option Allow While Using App or
Allow Once”)
12.             manager.startUpdatingLocation()
13.         default:
14.             print(“default”)
15.         }
16.     }
17. func locationManager(_ manager: CLLocationManager,
didUpdateLocations locations: [CLLocation]) {
18.         location = manager.location?.coordinate
19.     }
20.     func locationManager(_ manager: CLLocationManager,
didFailWithError error: Error) {
21.         print(“Error getting location”, error)

--- Page 252 ---
22.     }
23. }
 
The provided code is an extension of the LocationManager class that
adopts the CLLocationManagerDelegate protocol. This extension defines
several delegate methods for managing location services using Core
Location. Let us break down what each part of the code does:
  
Line It declares an extension of the LocationManager class, specifying
that it adopts the CLLocationManagerDelegate protocol. By doing this,
the class can respond to various events and updates related to location
services.
 
Line This function is called when the authorization status for location
access changes. The manager parameter represents the
CLLocationManager instance. Inside this function, a switch statement is
used to handle different authorization status scenarios. Here is what each
case represents:
  
This case is executed when the user has not yet made a determination
regarding location access. It typically happens the first time the app
requests location access.
 
This case is executed when location access is restricted by parental control
settings.
 

--- Page 253 ---
This case is executed when the user explicitly selects the Don’t Allow
option in response to the location access request.
 
This case is executed when the user selects either the Allow While Using
App or Allow Once option. After which we start updating the location by
calling
 
This is a catch-all case executed when none of the above cases match.
 
Line This function is a part of the CLLocationManagerDelegate methods
and is called when the device’s location is updated. The manager
parameter represents the CLLocationManager instance, and the locations
parameter contains an array of CLLocation objects, which represent the
updated location data. Inside this function, the code extracts the
coordinate information from the CLLocation object and stores it in the
location variable, which we declared earlier. This allows the app to keep
track of the most recent location.
 
Line This function is called when there is an error in the location update
process. The manager parameter represents the CLLocationManager
instance, and the error parameter contains information about the error.
Inside this function, we just print the error message to the console.
 
Our configuration for accessing the user’s current location is complete,
but there is one vital step remaining before we can obtain the user’s
information, and that is setting up the request for the user’s permission.
The steps are as follows:

--- Page 254 ---
  
In the Project Navigator, locate your Info.plist file, which is named
Info.plist and can be found under the main project folder.
 
Right-click (or Control-click) the Info.plist file, and select “Open As” >
“Source Code”. This will allow you to edit the file in XML.
 
Add the necessary keys to request location permissions:
  
To request “When in Use” location access (when the app is in the
foreground), add the following key-value pair inside the element:
NSLocationWhenInUseUsageDescription We need your location to get
the weather information
 
To request “Always” location access (when the app is both in the
foreground and background), add the following key-value pair instead:
NSLocationAlwaysUsageDescription We need your location to get the
weather information
 
Save and close the Info.plist file.
 
Info.plist XML should look as shown here:
 
version=”1.0” encoding=”UTF-8”?>
plist PUBLIC “-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN”
“http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd”>

--- Page 255 ---
version=”1.0”>
NSLocationWhenInUseUsageDescription
We need your location to get the weather information
NSLocationAlwaysUsageDescription
We need your location to get the weather information
UIApplicationSceneManifest
UIApplicationSupportsTabbedSceneCollection
UIApplicationSupportsMultipleScenes
UISceneConfigurations
UIWindowSceneSessionRoleApplication
UISceneConfigurationName
Default Configuration
UISceneDelegateClassName
$(PRODUCT_MODULE_NAME).SceneDelegate
UISceneStoryboardFile
Main
 
All the required steps to fetch the current user’s location have been
successfully created. Now, let us proceed to create the user interface to
witness this functionality in practical use.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 256 ---
 
UI Setup for Weather App
 
In the earlier chapter, Building a To-Do we explored the process of
building a user interface using storyboards. In this chapter, we will
take a programmatic approach to craft the UI. Let us create a new
Swift file and name it We will follow the steps listed here:
  
UI creation and AutoLayout Firstly, we will add the user interface
elements and layout them on the screen using different layout
constraints.
 
import Foundation
import UIKit
 
class WeatherView: UIView {
let titleLabel: UILabel = {
let label = UILabel()
label.text = “Weather App”
label.font = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 36)
label.textColor = .white
label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return label
}()

--- Page 257 ---
 
let weatherLabel: UILabel = {
let label = UILabel()
label.text = “Sunny”
label.font = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 24)
label.textColor = .white
label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return label
}()
 
let temperatureLabel: UILabel = {
let label = UILabel()
label.text = “25°C”
label.font = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize:36)
label.textColor = .white
label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return label
}()
 
let minMaxTempLabel: UILabel = {
let label = UILabel()
label.text = “Min: 20°C  Max: 30°C”
label.font = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 18)
label.textColor = .white
label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return label

--- Page 258 ---
}()
 
let windSpeedLabel: UILabel = {
let label = UILabel()
label.text = “Wind Speed: 5 m/s”
label.font = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 18)
label.textColor = .white
label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return label
}()
 
let humidityLabel: UILabel = {
let label = UILabel()
label.text = “Humidity: 65%”
label.font = UIFont.systemFont(ofSize: 18)
label.textColor = .white
label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return label
}()
 
let fetchWeatherButton: UIButton = {
let button = UIButton()
button.setTitle(“Get Weather”, for: .normal)
button.setTitleColor(.white, for: .normal)
button.backgroundColor = .blue
button.layer.cornerRadius = 8

--- Page 259 ---
button.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return button
}()
 
let activityIndicator: UIActivityIndicatorView = {
let indicator = UIActivityIndicatorView(style: .large)
indicator.color = .white
indicator.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return indicator
}()
 
We have accomplished the creation of several labels (for temperature,
min/max temperature, wind speed, and humidity), a button for fetching
current weather data, and an activity indicator that will be used during
weather data retrieval. These elements have also been configured with
custom fonts, colors, and titles, which you can tailor to your
preferences.
 
However, our work is not finished. To fully integrate these elements
into the user interface, we will implement the setupUI method. This
method goes beyond just adding these components; it will also take
care of their precise positioning on the screen by utilizing auto-layout
constraints, ensuring a well-organized and visually appealing layout.
 
override init(frame: CGRect) {
super.init(frame: frame)

--- Page 260 ---
setupUI()
}
 
required init?(coder aDecoder: NSCoder) {
super.init(coder: aDecoder)
}
 
The following code snippet is where we add all the previously
generated elements into the view. Additionally, we establish distinct
layout constraints to ensure that these elements are positioned correctly
on the screen.
 
private func setupUI() {
self.backgroundColor = .brown
addSubview(titleLabel)
addSubview(weatherLabel)
addSubview(temperatureLabel)
addSubview(minMaxTempLabel)
addSubview(windSpeedLabel)
addSubview(humidityLabel)
addSubview(fetchWeatherButton)
addSubview(activityIndicator)
 
// Layout constraints
NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
titleLabel.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerXAnchor),

--- Page 261 ---
titleLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
safeAreaLayoutGuide.topAnchor, constant: 20),
 
weatherLabel.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerXAnchor),
weatherLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: titleLabel.bottomAnchor,
constant: 10),
 
temperatureLabel.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerXAnchor),
temperatureLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
weatherLabel.bottomAnchor, constant: 10),
 
minMaxTempLabel.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
centerXAnchor),
minMaxTempLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
temperatureLabel.bottomAnchor, constant: 10),
 
windSpeedLabel.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerXAnchor),
windSpeedLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
minMaxTempLabel.bottomAnchor, constant: 10),
 
humidityLabel.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerXAnchor),
humidityLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
windSpeedLabel.bottomAnchor, constant: 10),
 

--- Page 262 ---
fetchWeatherButton.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
centerXAnchor),
fetchWeatherButton.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
humidityLabel.bottomAnchor, constant: 20),
fetchWeatherButton.widthAnchor.constraint(equalToConstant: 150),
fetchWeatherButton.heightAnchor.constraint(equalToConstant: 50),
 
activityIndicator.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerXAnchor),
.centerYAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerYAnchor)
])
 
fetchWeatherButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(fetchWeather),
for: .touchUpInside)
}
 
The following code snippet is where we add a target method for the
which will be called with the click of the button.
 
@objc private func fetchWeather() {
activityIndicator.startAnimating()
}
 
Implement a delegate method. To pass on the button, click the event in
the We will incorporate the following code into the WeatherView file.
 
protocol WeatherViewDelegate: AnyObject {

--- Page 263 ---
func didTapFetchWeather()
}
 
This code defines a Swift protocol named The protocol is marked with
which restricts it to being adopted only by class types. This is a
common practice for delegate protocols since they often involve weak
references to avoid retain cycles.
 
weak var delegate: WeatherViewDelegate?
 
Within the same class, we will declare the delegate property, which is
declared as a weak reference to an object that conforms to the
WeatherViewDelegate protocol.
 
@objc private func fetchWeather() {
activityIndicator.startAnimating()
delegate?.didTapFetchWeather()
}
 
Here, the delegate is given an opportunity to respond to the user’s
action of tapping to fetch weather data. If an object has been set as the
delegate and conforms to the WeatherViewDelegate protocol, this
delegate method, will be called to initiate the actual weather data
retrieval process.
 

--- Page 264 ---
Do not worry if you do not understand the code fully; it will make
more sense when you actually see it doing its magic.
 
Let us head to the ViewController file and add this view to the screen.
Add the following code:
 
import UIKit
class ViewController: UIViewController {
let weatherView = WeatherView()
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
// Do any additional setup after loading the view.)
self.view = weatherView
}
}
 
Here, an instance of the WeatherView class is created and stored in a
property named This indicates that the ViewController will use a
custom view that we just created.
  
self.view = This line assigns the weatherView instance as the view of
the In other words, it sets the custom WeatherView as the primary
content of this replacing the default view that a UIViewController
comes with.
 

--- Page 265 ---
Now when you build and run the app, you should see the screen as
shown in Figure
 

--- Page 268 ---
 
Figure 5.3: WeatherView
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 269 ---
 
Setup App Icon and Launch Screen
 
To give our app a polished appearance, it is essential to include an app
icon and a splash screen. To set up an app icon, follow the steps listed
here:
  
Navigate to the “Assets” folder within your project’s structure.
 
Inside the “Assets” folder, locate the “AppIcon” placeholder.
 
Drag and drop your app icon into this placeholder. Ensure that the icon
has the dimensions 1024x1024. After adding the app icon, the placeholder
will look similar to Figure
 

--- Page 270 ---
 
Figure 5.4: App Icon Setup
 
You can design the app icon using graphic design software, or you can
explore online icon generator services for this purpose.
 
Now, let us configure a splash screen, which is the initial screen that
appears when you launch the application. To create a launch screen,
follow these steps:
  
Locate and open the “LaunchScreen.storyboard” file in your project’s
structure.
 

--- Page 271 ---
Within this file, you have the freedom to design a launch screen according
to your preferences. You can add images and labels, modify the
background color of the view, and let your creativity shine. You can refer
to Figure 5.5 for an illustration. In this example, we have included a label
and made adjustments to its font and color.
 
 
Figure 5.5: Launch Screen Setup
  
Once you have completed the setup, build and run your app. You should
then observe that your app is equipped with a launch screen and an app
icon.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 272 ---
 
Web Service Integration and JSON Parsing
 
We need to get real-time weather data, for which we need to integrate a
web service that will give you real-time data according to your location.
 
Fetching data from the network in Swift is straightforward due to the
built-in APIs designed for network requests. To get started, we will focus
on these three key components:
  
This is the foundation for managing network tasks in Swift. It provides the
tools to create and handle data retrieval from the internet seamlessly.
 
A fundamental component for constructing and specifying the details of
your network requests. You can tailor requests to suit your requirements
by defining elements such as the URL, HTTP method, and headers.
 
Essential for handling data retrieved from the web. The decoder allows
you to parse and transform data, especially when it is in a structured
format such as JSON. This step is vital for extracting meaningful
information from the response.
 
With an understanding of these components, you will be well-equipped to
perform your own network requests and make the most of data from the
internet.

--- Page 273 ---
 
URLSession is a powerful and versatile framework in Swift that provides
a set of APIs for managing network tasks, enabling you to interact with
remote servers, fetch data from the internet, upload data, and more.
URLSession serves as the foundation for handling network tasks in Swift.
It offers a structured and efficient way to create, manage, and execute
various network requests, thus making it easier to interact with web
services and fetch data.
 
Networking tasks in Swift are inherently asynchronous. This means that
when you initiate a network task using your app does not block and wait
for the task to complete. Instead, the task runs in the background, and you
provide completion handlers to respond to the results when they become
available.
 
URLSession provides different types of tasks to accommodate various
network operations:
  
Data Task: Used for fetching data from a URL. It returns the data received
from the server.
 
Upload Task: Used for uploading data to a server. It allows you to send
data as the request body, such as when submitting a form.
 
Download Task: Used for downloading files or data from a URL. It can
save the downloaded content to a file.

--- Page 274 ---
 
WebSocket Task: Enables bidirectional communication with WebSocket-
based services.
 
Background Task: Allows tasks to continue running even when the app is
in the background or not running. This is useful for tasks that need to be
completed even if the app is not active.
 
You can configure the behavior of URLSession by providing a This
configuration can include settings such as timeouts, cache policies, and
the ability to work with various network protocols (HTTP, FTP, and so
on). URLSession is designed to efficiently handle data transfer, making it
suitable for various use cases, including downloading large files,
streaming data, and managing complex network interactions.
 
URLRequest : is an object designed to handle URL load requests,
primarily utilized for making network requests. It belongs to the
Foundation framework and offers a structured approach to specifying the
particulars of a network request, encompassing elements such as the URL,
the HTTP method, request headers, and the inclusion of a request body.
 
Here is a breakdown of key elements associated with a
  
This forms the cornerstone of the request and signifies the web address
from which you intend to retrieve data. You initiate a URL object and use
it to initialize the

--- Page 275 ---
 
HTTP This element decides the type of HTTP request you wish to
execute. Some common methods include GET (for data retrieval), POST
(for data submission to a server), PUT (for data updates), DELETE (for
data removal), and more.
 
HTTP It is possible to embed custom headers within the request to convey
supplementary information to the server. For instance, you might include
an “Authorization” header to facilitate authentication or a “Content-Type”
header to specify the data format.
 
HTTP In scenarios necessitating data transmission, such as POST and
PUT requests, you can encapsulate a data payload within the request body.
This is frequently used for sending data to a server, such as form
submissions or file uploads.
 
A URLRequest is frequently paired with URLSession to facilitate network
operations, including data retrieval from a server, submission of form
data, and interaction with web services.
 
Decoder is an essential component for handling data serialization and
deserialization, particularly when working with structured data formats
like JSON. It plays a vital role in converting raw data from external
sources, such as network responses, into native Swift data structures. The
primary purpose of a decoder is to make data usable within your Swift
application.

--- Page 276 ---
 
A decoder takes raw data, often in the form of bytes, and transforms it into
meaningful, structured data that can be used in your application. This is
crucial when dealing with data received from external sources, as it allows
you to work with the data in a format that is convenient for your app.
 
One of the most common use cases for a decoder in Swift is decoding
JSON data. JSON is a widely used data format for exchanging data
between a server and a client. A JSON decoder can convert JSON data
into Swift data structures, such as dictionaries, arrays, or custom data
models. We will see this in practical use in our app.
 
Swift simplifies the process of data decoding by introducing the Codable
protocol. Types that conform to Codable can be easily encoded to and
decoded from various external formats, including JSON. This protocol
combines Encodable (for encoding) and Decodable (for decoding) into a
single package. While the Codable protocol provides automatic decoding
for many scenarios, you can also implement custom decoding logic by
conforming to the Decodable protocol and writing your own decoding
code when needed. This is particularly useful when dealing with complex
data structures or non-standard data formats.
 
Decoding often involves not just converting data but also validating it to
ensure that it adheres to the expected structure. Decoders allow you to
handle validation and error cases during the decoding process.
 

--- Page 277 ---
We will see all these concepts in practical use in our app. We will be using
an OpenWeatherMap to fetch the current weather data. You will have to
create your account on this website to get the API key which we will be
using to call the API. Let us head back to Xcode to start the
implementation. Firstly, we will create a model for the API. You can refer
to the structure of the API response on the preceding link. We are not
going to use all the data provided by the API so we will create our model
accordingly. Let us create a Swift file and name it and add the following
code to it:
 
import Foundation
 
struct WeatherResponse: Decodable {
var coord: CoordinatesResponse
var weather: [WeatherResponse]
var main: MainResponse
var name: String
var wind: WindResponse
struct CoordinatesResponse: Decodable {
var lon: Double
var lat: Double
}
struct WeatherResponse: Decodable {
var id: Double
var main: String
var description: String
var icon: String
}

--- Page 278 ---
struct MainResponse: Decodable {
var temp: Double
var temp_min: Double
var temp_max: Double
var humidity: Double
}
struct WindResponse: Decodable {
var speed: Double
var deg: Double
}
}
 
This struct is used for decoding JSON data, received as a response from a
weather API. Each struct conforms to the Decodable protocol, indicating
that instances of the struct can be decoded from external data formats such
as JSON. We have mapped the structure according to the response that we
are going to receive from the weather API. Now, when we receive a JSON
response from the weather API, we will be using this model to decode it.
 
Next, we will create a file called Add the following code to it:
 
1. import Foundation
2. import CoreLocation
3.
4. class ApiManager {
5.     let API_Key = “Api_Key”

--- Page 279 ---
6.     func getWeather(latitude: CLLocationDegrees, longitude:
CLLocationDegrees) async throws -> WeatherResponse {
7.         guard let url = URL(string:
“https://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?lat=\(latitude)&lon=\
(longitude)&appid=\(API_Key)&units=metric”)
8.         else {
9.             fatalError(“Invalid URL”)
10.         }
11.         let urlRequest = URLRequest(url: url)
12.         let (data, response) = try await URLSession.shared.data(for:
urlRequest)
13.         guard (response as? HTTPURLResponse)?.statusCode == 200
else {
14.             fatalError(“Error fetching data”)
15.         }
16.         let weatherData = try
JSONDecoder().decode(WeatherResponse.self, from: data)
17.         return weatherData
18.     }
19. }
 
In this class, getWeather is an asynchronous function which is designed to
retrieve weather data for a specific geographical location, specified by
latitude and longitude coordinates. The function takes two parameters:
latitude and longitude, which are of type CLLocationDegrees. These
values determine the location for which weather data will be fetched.
Make sure to add your “API_Key” in line 5.
  

--- Page 280 ---
Line We first construct a URL using the provided latitude, longitude, and
the API key. The URL is formatted to make a request to the
OpenWeatherMap API, specifying the desired data units as “metric” (for
example, temperature in Celsius).
 
A guard statement is used to ensure that a valid URL is constructed. If the
URL creation fails, the program will terminate with a fatal error message,
indicating an “Invalid URL.”
 
Next, a URLRequest is created from the URL to prepare for the network
request.
 
Line We perform an asynchronous network request to fetch data from the
URL. The result is a tuple containing data and response, where data holds
the response data and response holds the network response itself.
 
Another guard statement checks if the response status code is equal to
200, which indicates a successful HTTP request. If the status code is not
200, the program terminates with an error message.
 
Line We use try to handle any errors. Using try and catch is a common
way to handle errors in Swift. Finally, the code uses a JSONDecoder to
decode the JSON data from the API response into a data model called The
function then returns this data model.
 

--- Page 281 ---
We have completed all the necessary setup for our weather app, and now
it is time for the final step to bring everything together. Let us return to the
ViewController file and assemble all the components. Add the following
code to the ViewController to create instances of all the classes we have
created so far:
 
let locationManager = LocationManager()
let apiManager = ApiManager()
var weather: WeatherResponse?
 
Next, we will conform to the WeatherViewDelegate protocol by adding it
to the Additionally, we need to implement the didTapFetchWeather
method within the delegate, where we will add the necessary code to fetch
weather data. After confirming to the delegate, the ViewController code
should appear as follows:
 
import UIKit
class ViewController: UIViewController, WeatherViewDelegate {
let locationManager = LocationManager()
let apiManager = ApiManager()
var weather: WeatherResponse?
let weatherView = WeatherView()
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
// Do any additional setup after loading the view.)
self.view = weatherView
weatherView.delegate = self
}

--- Page 282 ---
func didTapFetchWeather() {
}
}
 
Next, we must add the code within the didTapFetchWeather method,
which will be invoked when the button is clicked.
 
1. func didTapFetchWeather() {
2.    locationManager.requestLocation()
3.     Task {
4.         do {
5.        weather = try await apiManager.getWeather(latitude:
locationManager.location?.latitude ?? 0,
longitude:locationManager.location?.longitude ?? 0)
6.                 weatherView.titleLabel.text = weather?.name
7.                 weatherView.weatherLabel.text = weather?.weather[0].main
8.                 weatherView.temperatureLabel.text = “Temp : \
(weather?.main.temp ?? 0)°”
9.                 weatherView.minMaxTempLabel.text = “Min: \
(weather?.main.temp_min ?? 0)° Max: \(weather?.main.temp_max ?? 0)°”
10.                 weatherView.windSpeedLabel.text = “Wind Speed : \
(weather?.wind.speed ?? 0) m/s”
11.                 weatherView.humidityLabel.text = “Humidity : “ +
String(weather?.main.humidity ?? 0) + “ %”
12.                 weatherView.activityIndicator.stopAnimating()
13.             } catch {
14.                 print(“Error getting weather: \(error)”)
15.                 weatherView.activityIndicator.stopAnimating()

--- Page 283 ---
16.             }
17.         }
18.    }
  
Line We initiate a request to the locationManager to obtain the user’s
current location. The results will be used for fetching weather data for the
user’s location.
 
Line Next, we create a task to asynchronously fetch the data from the
weather API. Here, Task is a unit of asynchronous work that you can
create and run concurrently with other tasks. The async and await are
keywords that allow you to write asynchronous code. The usage of async
is to mark functions that perform asynchronous operations, and await is
used to pause the execution of a function until an asynchronous operation
completes.
 
Line It invokes the apiManager.getWeather method to fetch weather data.
The keyword await is used to pause the execution of a function until an
asynchronous operation completes. The await keyword indicates that this
operation is asynchronous, and it will suspend the current task until the
data is fetched. If successful, the weather data is assigned to the weather
variable.
 
Once weather data is obtained, the code proceeds to populate the UI
elements in the weatherView with relevant information. Each line updates
a specific UI element with data from the weather object, as explained
here:

--- Page 284 ---
  
Sets the text of a label in the UI to display the location’s name.
 
Updates a label with the weather condition.
 
Displays the temperature in degrees Celsius.
 
Shows the minimum and maximum temperature in degrees Celsius.
 
Displays the wind speed in meters per second.
 
Shows the humidity percentage.
 
Line It stops the activity indicator, indicating that the data retrieval
process is complete.
 
If any errors occur during the execution of the code in the do block, they
are caught and handled in the catch block.
 
Now, let us execute the application and observe the magic on screen.
When you run the app for the first time, default weather data will be
displayed. When you click the “Get Weather” button for the first time, you
will encounter a location permission popup, as illustrated in Figure
 

--- Page 286 ---
 
Figure 5.6: Location Permission
 
In an ideal scenario, when you grant location permission to the weather
app, specifically allowing it while using the app, the app should
commence fetching the current weather every time you click the “Get
Weather” button. However, because we do not have a predefined location
set for the simulator, let us simulate our location. To do this, click the
location icon in the Xcode console, as illustrated in Figure and select any
location from the list to simulate it as your current location.
 
 
Figure 5.7: Select Location
 
Once you have established the current location and clicked the button, you
should witness the current weather being presented on the screen, as
shown in Figure

--- Page 287 ---
 

--- Page 289 ---
 
Figure 5.8: Current Weather
 
Our weather app implementation is now complete, but the potential for
this app is vast. You have the creative freedom to enhance the user
interface, enrich the data, and introduce additional functionality, opening
the door to many possibilities for further development and innovation.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 290 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Throughout our journey in building the weather app, we explored
essential iOS concepts. We began by exploring the Core Location and
understanding how to retrieve the current user’s location. We then
looked into crafting a visually appealing user interface using a
programmatic approach, ensuring our app provides a great user
experience.
 
In addition to UI design, we also tackled the essential aspects of setting
up the app icon and creating a launch screen. These components add
professional touch to our app.
 
Further, we looked into web services, explored the efficient way to
make the network requests using URLRequest and URLSession.
Furthermore, we implemented the decoding process using Decodable
to efficiently parse real-time data, transforming it into meaningful
information that our app can utilize.
 
These fundamental iOS concepts are crucial building blocks that will
play a significant role in numerous applications going forward. What
we have covered are just the foundational aspects of these concepts,

--- Page 291 ---
but in practice, their applications are vast and diverse within real-world
apps.
 
In the upcoming chapter, we will explore examples showcasing how
these fundamental concepts can be applied to achieve effective
interactions with social media platforms.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 292 ---
 
References
  
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/urlsession
 
Core https://developer.apple.com/documentation/corelocation
 
https://openweathermap.org/current
 
Project https://github.com/ava-orange-education/iOS-App-
Development-Projects-Handbook
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 293 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
Which Core Location method is used to request location updates?
  
requestLocation()
 
getLocation()
 
startUpdatingLocation()
 
getCurrentLocation()
 
Which Core Location class is responsible for managing location
updates?
  
CLLocation
 
CLLocationManager
 
CLLocationDelegate
 

--- Page 294 ---
LocationCoordinator
 
To use Core Location services, what permission is required from the
user?
  
Camera access
 
Microphone access
 
Location access
 
Contact access
 
Which framework in iOS provides URLSession for network tasks?
  
UIKit
 
Foundation
 
CoreLocation
 
CoreData
 
What is the primary purpose of URLRequests in network tasks?

--- Page 295 ---
  
Handling user location
 
Specifying the details of network requests
 
Managing UI components
 
Caching user data
 
What is URLSession used for in iOS?
  
Creating user interfaces
 
Managing network requests
 
Storing user data
 
Managing user authentication
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 296 ---
 
Answers
  
c
 
b
 
c
 
b
 
b
 
b
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 297 ---
CHAPTER 6
 
Integrating Social Media
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 298 ---
 
Introduction
 
Social media login allows users to sign up or log in to your app using
their existing social media credentials. This simplifies the onboarding
process, as users do not need to create and remember new usernames
and passwords.
 
In this chapter, we will look into the integration of social media into
our iOS app, using Facebook as our example platform. We will explore
essential functionalities, including creating an app on the Facebook
Developers Portal, implementing Facebook login within the app,
viewing user profiles, and enabling post sharing on user accounts. By
the end of this chapter, you will have gained a comprehensive
understanding of seamlessly integrating Facebook into your app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 299 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Creating an App on Facebook Portal
 
Integrating Third-Party Library
 
Facebook SDK Setup
 
User Interface Creation
 
Login with Facebook
 
Viewing User Profile
 
Sharing a Post on Facebook
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 300 ---
 
Creating an App on Facebook Portal
 
To integrate Facebook into our app, the initial step involves creating a
project on the Facebook portal by following these steps:
  
Navigate to the Facebook Developers Portal and initiate the creation of a
new app. Customize the fundamental settings, which include specifying
the app name, selecting the platform as iOS, and defining the bundle
identifier.
 
Next, navigate to use cases and add Authentication and account creation,
as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 6.1: Enable authentication and account creation
  

--- Page 301 ---
Integrating Third-Party Library
 
In iOS development, there are several ways to add third-party
dependencies, such as libraries or frameworks, to your project. Here are
some common methods:
  
CocoaPods: CocoaPods is one of the dependency managers that can be
used in iOS projects. It simplifies the process of adding and managing
dependencies in Xcode projects. It automates the process of downloading,
configuring, and updating dependencies, making it easier to manage the
dependencies and keep them up-to-date.
 
Carthage: Unlike CocoaPods, Carthage builds frameworks that you
manually integrate into your Xcode project. Carthage is a decentralized
dependency manager that builds frameworks that you can manually
integrate into your project.
 
Swift Package Manager (SPM): SPM is an official package manager from
Apple. It is integrated into Xcode and allows you to manage dependencies
for your Swift packages.
 
We will be using Swift Package Manager as our dependency manager for
our project.
 
Swift packages were introduced by Apple to streamline the management
of dependencies in Swift applications. It is a dependency manager and

--- Page 302 ---
build tool that simplifies the process of integrating external code into your
iOS projects. A Swift package is a way to distribute Swift code, such as
libraries or frameworks, in a modular and reusable format. Using Swift
packages promotes code modularity, reusability, and easier collaboration
between developers. It simplifies the process of managing dependencies,
reduces the risk of version conflicts, and provides a standardized way to
include external libraries in your Swift projects. The Swift Package
Manager has become the preferred choice for managing dependencies in
the Swift ecosystem.
 
Here are some key points about Swift packages:
  
Swift packages are defined by a manifest file called This file contains
information about the package, its dependencies, and how it should be
built.
 
Swift packages can declare dependencies on other packages, specifying
the version or range of versions that are compatible with the current
package.
 
The source code of a Swift package is typically organized into a specific
directory structure. The package manager expects to find source files in
designated locations within the package.
 
Swift Package Manager provides commands to manage packages. These
commands include swift package init to initialize a new package, swift
package update to fetch the latest versions of dependencies, and swift

--- Page 303 ---
package generate-xcodeproj to generate an Xcode project for your
package.
 
Swift packages are often hosted on version control systems such as
GitHub. You can specify a package’s URL in your Package.swift file to
easily integrate it into your project.
 
Swift packages support cross-platform development. You can use them in
both iOS and macOS projects, as well as in projects for other platforms
that support Swift.
 
Initially, let us start by creating a new project in Xcode, naming it
‘SocialMediaApp’. You can follow the steps outlined in the preceding
chapters for guidance on creating the project. Following that, we will
proceed to integrate Swift packages into our project. To do this, navigate
to ‘File’ -> ‘Add Package as illustrated in Figure
 

--- Page 305 ---
 
Figure 6.2: Add Package Dependencies
 
Subsequently, we will integrate the Facebook package. To do this, search
for https://github.com/facebook/facebook-ios-sdk and specify the latest
SDK version (16.2.1), as demonstrated in Figure
 
 
Figure 6.3: Add Package
 
Click on Add Package and select Target as the project name, as shown in
Figure
 
We will only need FacebookCore, FacebookLogin, and FacebookShare to
be added to this project. Next, click on Add Now you should see a
package added to your project.

--- Page 306 ---
 
 
Figure 6.4: Facebook Package
 
We will also add one more package, called for loading the image in our
app. You can add the package following the aforementioned process using
Also, we will only add SDWebImage to our project target, as shown in
Figure
 

--- Page 307 ---
 
Figure 6.5: SDWebImage Package
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 308 ---
 
Facebook SDK Setup
 
We will begin by incorporating the Facebook login feature into the app.
However, before proceeding, we need to perform some essential setup in
the project to use the Facebook SDK. Initially, we need to add specific
properties to the info.plist file. To do this, navigate to the info.plist in the
project folder structure, click on it, and open it as a source code. Append
the following lines to the info.plist: after version=“1.0”>.
 
LSApplicationQueriesSchemes
fbapi
fb-messenger-share-api
CFBundleURLTypes
CFBundleURLSchemes
fbAppID //Replace just AppID which would be something like
fb12345678
FacebookAppID
AppID //Replace AppID here FacebookClientToken
ClientToken //Replace Client Token here
FacebookDisplayName
SocialMediaApp
 
Make sure to replace fbAppID and AppID values from the Facebook
portal. You can find them in the app settings, as shown in Figure

--- Page 309 ---
 
 
Figure 6.6: AppID
 
Also, replace ClientToken with the values from the Facebook portal. You
can find them in App Settings -> as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 6.7: Client Token
 
Next, let us head to the AppDelegate file, import and add the following
lines to the function:
 
func application(_ application: UIApplication,
didFinishLaunchingWithOptions launchOptions:
[UIApplication.LaunchOptionsKey: Any]?) -> Bool {

--- Page 310 ---
// Override point for customization after application launch.
ApplicationDelegate.shared.application(
application,
didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: launchOptions
)
return true
}
 
The ApplicationDelegate class is part of the Facebook SDK. Here, the
shared instance of ApplicationDelegate is used to call its
application(_:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:) method. This is
necessary for initializing and setting up the Facebook SDK within the app.
 
Next, we will move to import and add the following function:
 
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, openURLContexts URLContexts: Set) {
guard let url = URLContexts.first?.url else {
return
}
ApplicationDelegate.shared.application(
UIApplication.shared,
open: url,
sourceApplication: nil,
annotation: [UIApplication.OpenURLOptionsKey.annotation]
)
}
 

--- Page 311 ---
This code is part of the handling of URL opening in the app, particularly
in the context of integrating the Facebook SDK. This method gets called
when the app is asked to open a URL. This code essentially ensures that
when the app is asked to open a URL, the Facebook SDK is given the
opportunity to handle the URL, which is essential for functionalities such
as Facebook login.
 
We have done the basic setup that is needed in our app. Now, let us
proceed to add some UI.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 312 ---
 
User Interface Creation
 
We will create a UI programmatically, which we will integrate into the
ViewController file. To create a UI, we will first create a Swift file
called Let us add the following code to that file:
 
import Foundation
import UIKit
import FBSDKLoginKit
 
final class BaseView: UIView {
private let stackView: UIStackView = {
let this = UIStackView()
this.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
this.axis = .vertical
this.alignment = .leading
this.spacing = 14
return this
}()
 
let loginButton: FBLoginButton = {
let this = FBLoginButton()
this.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false

--- Page 313 ---
return this
}()
 
let profileButton: UIButton = {
let this = UIButton()
var configuration = UIButton.Configuration.filled()
configuration.title = “Profile”
configuration.baseBackgroundColor = .orange
this.configuration = configuration
this.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return this
}()
 
let shareButton: UIButton = {
let this = UIButton()
var configuration = UIButton.Configuration.filled()
configuration.title = “Share”
configuration.baseBackgroundColor = .purple
this.configuration = configuration
this.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
return this
}()
 
// MARK: - Init
 
override init(frame: CGRect) {

--- Page 314 ---
super.init(frame: frame)
setupViews()
setupLayout()
}
 
required init?(coder: NSCoder) {
fatalError(“init(coder:) has not been implemented”)
}
 
// MARK: - Setup
 
private func setupViews() {
self.backgroundColor = .white
addSubview(stackView)
stackView.addArrangedSubview(loginButton)
stackView.addArrangedSubview(profileButton)
stackView.addArrangedSubview(shareButton)
}
 
private func setupLayout() {
NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
stackView.centerYAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerYAnchor),
stackView.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerXAnchor),
profileButton.widthAnchor.constraint(equalToConstant: 210),
shareButton.widthAnchor.constraint(equalToConstant: 210),
])

--- Page 315 ---
}
}
 
By implementing the provided code, we have incorporated a stackview
into the view and populated it with three buttons: one for logging in,
another for viewing the profile, and the third for sharing a post to
Facebook. The FBSDKLoginKit is utilized to create a login button
from the Facebook SDK, streamlining the management of various
states. The setupLayout method is responsible for defining the layout
constraints for the view.
 
Let us head to ViewController and add this BaseView to it. Firstly,
import FBSDKLoginKit at the top in Next, confirm to
LoginButtonDelegate as follows:
 
class ViewController: UIViewController,LoginButtonDelegate
 
Create a baseView object using;
 
let baseView = BaseView()
 
Add the following code to where we add the baseView to the view of
the ViewController and confirm it to the delegate:
 
override func viewDidLoad() {

--- Page 316 ---
super.viewDidLoad()
// Do any additional setup after loading the view.
self.view = baseView
baseView.loginButton.delegate = self
setupView()
}
 
We will also add setupView method as follows:
 
func setupView() {
if let token = AccessToken.current,
!token.isExpired {
baseView.profileButton.isHidden = false
baseView.shareButton.isHidden = false
}
else {
baseView.profileButton.isHidden = true
baseView.shareButton.isHidden = true
}
}
 
In the preceding method, we are showing the profile and share button
based on the login state. When a user is logged in, they will have an
active AccessToken and based on that we will show the profile and
share button.
 

--- Page 317 ---
We will also need to add the delegate methods for the login button as
follows, where we call the setupView method to update the state of the
UI based on the login.
 
// MARK: - Login
func loginButton(_ loginButton: FBSDKLoginKit.FBLoginButton,
didCompleteWith result:
FBSDKLoginKit.LoginManagerLoginResult?, error: Error?) {
setupView()
}
 
func loginButtonDidLogOut(_ loginButton:
FBSDKLoginKit.FBLoginButton) {
setupView()
}
 
Let us run the app and check the login functionality. You should see
the screen in Figure 6.8 with the Login button. When you click on the
Login button, it will ask you to log in with your Facebook account.
 

--- Page 320 ---
 
Figure 6.8: Facebook
 
After you have completed your login, you should see the Profile and
Share buttons on the screen, and the Login button state should change
to Log as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 323 ---
 
Figure 6.9: User Interface
 
We have successfully integrated the Facebook login now. Now let us
add some functionality to the profile button to view the user profile.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 324 ---
 
Viewing User Profile
 
Firstly, we will add a click event for the profile button in ViewDidLoad
using the following code:
 
baseView.profileButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(getProfile), for:
.touchUpInside)
 
Next, we will add a getProfile method as follows:
 
1. @objc func getProfile(){
2.         if AccessToken.current != nil {
3.             let parameters = [“fields”:”first_name, last_name, email,
picture”]
4.             GraphRequest(graphPath: “me”, parameters: parameters).start {
connection, result, error in
5.                 if let result = result {
6.                     print(“Fetched Result: \(result)”)
7.                }
8.             }
9.         }
10.    }
  

--- Page 325 ---
Line It checks if there is a current access token, ensuring that the user is
logged in to Facebook before attempting to fetch the profile information.
 
Line If there is a valid access token, the function constructs a dictionary of
parameters in line 3, specifying the fields to retrieve from the user’s
Facebook profile: first name, last name, email, and picture.
 
Line 4: It then creates a GraphRequest with the specified parameters and
initiates the request using the start method. The class in the Facebook
SDK, is used to make calls to the Facebook API. This allows the app to
retrieve and send data to Facebook’s servers, such as fetching user
profiles, posting content, and querying other information available
through the API. In our case, we are trying to fetch basic user information.
The closure provided to start is executed when the request is completed.
 
Inside the closure, the code checks if the result is not nil, and if so, it
prints the fetched result to the console. The result will contain the user’s
profile information.
 
Now let us run the app and when you click on the profile button, it should
print the user information.
 
However, to showcase the retrieved information, we must design a user
interface. To achieve this, let us generate a new ViewController.swift file
and name it Navigate to the Main.storyboard file. Initially, embed the
ViewController in a navigation controller, a procedure covered in previous
chapters. Subsequently, introduce a new ViewController to the storyboard

--- Page 326 ---
and associate it with Additionally, assign the storyboard ID to this
controller, as as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 6.10: ProfileViewController
 

--- Page 327 ---
In the ProfileViewController on the storyboard, let us include two labels
— one for displaying the name and the other for the email. Additionally,
add an imageView to showcase the profile picture. Establish the necessary
outlets for these elements in the The following lines should be integrated
into the ProfileViewController.swift file:
 
@IBOutlet weak var profilePic: UIImageView!
@IBOutlet weak var nameLabel: UILabel!
@IBOutlet weak var emailLabel: UILabel!
 
The process of adding these views to the storyboard from the object
library and creating outlets for them has been covered in a previous
chapter, specifically in Chapter 4, Building a To-Do List Additionally,
apply AutoLayout constraints to these views in the storyboard. The
positioning of the views can be tailored according to your preferences, and
you can refer to Chapter 2, Getting Started with iOS App and Chapter 4,
Building a To-Do List for guidance on implementing AutoLayout using
the storyboard. We will arrange them as illustrated in Figure
 

--- Page 329 ---
 
Figure 6.11: ProfileViewController
 
Next, navigate to the ProfileViewController.swift file and include the
following line to create a dictionary that will store the profile data fetched
from Facebook.
 
var profileData = NSDictionary()
 
We will also create a method called setupData as follows. The setupData()
function is designed to populate the UI elements with the user’s profile
data:
 
1. func setupData(){
2.         if let firstname = profileData[“first_name”] as? String {
3.             var name = firstname
4.             if let lastname = profileData[“last_name”] as? String {
5.                 name = “\(name) \(lastname)”
6.             }
7.             nameLabel.text = name
8.         }
9.         if let email = profileData[“email”] as? String {
10.             emailLabel.text = email
11.         }
12.         var pictureUrl = “”
13.         if let picture = profileData[“picture”] as? NSDictionary, let data =
picture[“data”] as? NSDictionary, let url = data[“url”] as? String {

--- Page 330 ---
14.             pictureUrl = url
15.         }
16.         profilePic.sd_setImage(with: URL(string: pictureUrl))
17.     }
 
Line We extract the first name from the profileData dictionary. If a last
name is also present, we will concatenate the first and last names and
assign the result to the name variable. The name is then assigned to the
text property of the
 
Line We check if there is an email in the profileData dictionary and assign
it to the text property of the
 
Line We extract the URL of the profile picture from the profileData
dictionary. It navigates through nested dictionaries to access the URL and
assigns it to the pictureUrl variable.
 
Line It uses the sd_setImage method from SDWebImage to
asynchronously load the profile picture into the profilePic UIImageView
using the URL obtained. Make sure to import SDWebImage at the top of
 
Next, we will head to the ViewDidLoad method and add the following
code to it:
 
1. override func viewDidLoad() {
2.         super.viewDidLoad()

--- Page 331 ---
3.         // Do any additional setup after loading the view.
4.         profilePic.layer.cornerRadius = profilePic.frame.width/2
5.         profilePic.clipsToBounds = true
6.         profilePic.contentMode = .scaleAspectFill
7.         setupData()
8.     }
 
Line It sets the corner radius of the profilePic UIImageView to create
rounded corners. The value is calculated as half of the width of the
making it a circle.
 
Line The clipToBounds keyword is set to true to ensure that the content
does not extend beyond the bounds of the profilePic view.
 
Line It sets the content mode of the profilePic to ensuring that the profile
picture fills the bounds of the profilePic while maintaining its aspect ratio.
This is commonly used to avoid distortion when displaying images.
 
Next, we call the setupData method to set the data to the user interface.
 
We have all the necessary setup to display the profile information. Now,
we just need to populate the profileData dictionary with user profile data.
To do this, we will head back to the ViewController.Swift file and, in the
getProfile method that we created earlier, add the following lines when the
result is fetched:
 

--- Page 332 ---
if let result = result {
print(“Fetched Result: \(result)”)
let viewController =
self.storyboard?.instantiateViewController(withIdentifier: “profileVC”)
as! ProfileViewController
viewController.profileData = result as! NSDictionary
self.navigationController?.pushViewController(viewController, animated:
true)
}
 
Here, we are adding a reference to profileViewController and initializing
the profileData with the result obtained from the Facebook user profile.
After that we will navigate the user to the Now, if you run the app and
click on the Profile button, you should see your profile information
displayed on the profile screen. We have successfully completed profile
fetching and display in this part. In the next section, we will look into
sharing a post on your Facebook profile from our app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 333 ---
 
Sharing a Post on Facebook
 
Let us head back to the ViewController.swift file and add the
functionality to the share button that we created earlier. Firstly, we will
add a click event for the share button in the ViewDidLoad method as
follows:
 
baseView.shareButton.addTarget(self, action: #selector(sharePost), for:
.touchUpInside)
 
We will also import FBSDKShareKit and confirm it to and
UINavigationControllerDelegate as follows:
 
class ViewController: UIViewController,LoginButtonDelegate,
SharingDelegate, UIImagePickerControllerDelegate,
UINavigationControllerDelegate
 
We will go through the use of the delegate method as we proceed. We
will also add the following line: var imagePicker =
UIImagePickerController() to create a reference to
 
In iOS development, UIImagePickerController is a system-provided
ViewController that allows the user to pick or capture images and

--- Page 334 ---
videos from the device’s photo library or camera. It is part of the UIKit
framework and is commonly used for scenarios such as profile picture
selection, image attachments, or any feature that requires user
interaction with the device’s media. We will be using it to share the
image on the Facebook profile.
 
Next, create a method sharePost and add the following code to it:
 
@objc func sharePost(){
if
UIImagePickerController.isSourceTypeAvailable(.savedPhotosAlbum)
{
imagePicker.delegate = self
imagePicker.sourceType = .savedPhotosAlbum
imagePicker.allowsEditing = true
present(imagePicker, animated: true, completion: nil)
}
}
 
Using the preceding code, when the user clicks on the share button, it
will initiate the which will open a photo library from the phone. You
can select to edit the photo as well. We are trying to post a picture
using the preceding code. Next up, we will be implementing the
imagePicker delegate as follows:
 

--- Page 335 ---
1. func imagePickerController(_ picker: UIImagePickerController,
didFinishPickingMediaWithInfo info:
[UIImagePickerController.InfoKey : Any]) {
2.         guard let image = info[.originalImage] as? UIImage else {
3.             return
4.         }
5.         let photo = SharePhoto(
6.             image: image,
7.             isUserGenerated: true
8.         )
9.         let content = SharePhotoContent()
10.         content.photos = [photo]
11.         self.dismiss(animated: true, completion: { () -> Void in
12.             let dialog = ShareDialog(
13.                 viewController: self,
14.                 content: content,
15.                 delegate: self
16.             )
17.             dialog.show()
18.         })
19.     }
 
Line It ensures that there is a value for the original image in the
information dictionary obtained from the image picker. If there is, it
unwraps and assigns the image to the image constant; otherwise, the
method returns.

--- Page 336 ---
 
Line Using the retrieved image, a SharePhoto object is created. The
isUserGenerated parameter is set to true to indicate that the photo is
user-generated.
 
Line SharePhotoContent object is created, which is part of and the
photos property is set with an array containing the previously created
 
Line we dismiss the picker, a shareDialog is initiated, which is
populated with the selected image, and line 17 initiates that dialog to
show on the screen.
 
We will also need to implement the delegate for shareDialog as we
specified them to self in line 15.
 
We will also add the following SharingDelegate methods to the You
can implement different conditions in these delegate methods. We will
just add print statements to them for now to see the transition of the
calls:
 
func sharer(_ sharer: FBSDKShareKit.Sharing,
didCompleteWithResults results: [String : Any]) {
print(“complete”)
}
 

--- Page 337 ---
func sharer(_ sharer: FBSDKShareKit.Sharing, didFailWithError
error: Error) {
print(“failed”,error)
}
 
func sharerDidCancel(_ sharer: FBSDKShareKit.Sharing) {
print(“cancelled”)
}
 
Now, let us build and run the app and check the share functionality by
clicking on the share button.
 
When you click on the share button, it should open up the image
picker from your simulator, as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 340 ---
 
Figure 6.12: ImagePicker
 
On selection of the image, it should open a dialog with the selected
image pre-filled, as shown in Figure You can populate this post with
custom text and when you click on a post, it will share this post to your
Facebook profile.
 

--- Page 343 ---
 
Figure 6.13: Share Dialog
 
You have successfully created a post from your app. For a more
advanced exploration, consider experimenting with video content
sharing through your app. You can test the logout feature by clicking
on the logout button. The screen should revert to the initial user
interface state, hiding the profile and share buttons.
 
While we have covered some fundamental aspects of Facebook
integration in the app, it is essential to recognize that the potential for
integrating diverse features into your application is limitless. The
journey ahead holds an array of possibilities for enhancing and
customizing your app to meet a variety of needs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 344 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Within this chapter, we explored the process of integrating the
Facebook SDK into our application. Throughout this journey, we
looked into the utilization of Swift Package Manager, a valuable tool
for managing dependencies for our app. The integration of the
Facebook SDK was a focal point, laying the foundation for various
functionalities that enhance the user experience.
 
We looked into the creation of a user interface, and the implementation
of the login functionality was a crucial step, streamlining the
onboarding process and facilitating user access through Facebook
credentials.
 
Furthermore, we extended the capabilities of our app by incorporating
functionality to retrieve and display user profiles sourced directly from
Facebook. This enriches the user experience by enabling individuals to
access and interact with their social identity within the app.
 
Additionally, we looked into the concept of the image picker, a feature
that enhances user interaction by allowing them to select and utilize
images conveniently. The integration of this element is particularly

--- Page 345 ---
valuable when combined with the capability to share posts directly on
Facebook.
 
In essence, this chapter provided a holistic view of the integration
process, covering Swift Package Manager usage, Facebook SDK
integration, user interface creation, login functionality, user profile
retrieval, and the implementation of post-sharing capabilities. There
are numerous additional capabilities you can explore within the
Facebook integration. To discover these possibilities, you can explore
the detailed documentation provided by Facebook. The link to this
resource is available in the reference section.
 
In the upcoming chapter, we will learn about HealthKit, which is one
of the frameworks introduced by Apple and is widely used while
developing health and fitness applications.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 346 ---
 
References
  
Swift
 
Facebook
 
Facebook https://developers.facebook.com/docs/
 
Project https://github.com/ava-orange-education/iOS-App-
Development-Projects-Handbook
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 347 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
What is Swift Package Manager (SPM)?
  
A framework for designing user interfaces in Swift
 
A dependency manager for Swift projects
 
An integrated development environment for Swift
 
A tool for version control in Swift
 
To integrate the Facebook SDK into an iOS app, what is the first step
you need to take on the Facebook developer portal?
  
Design the app’s user interface
 
Register the app for push notifications
 
Create a new app on the Facebook portal
 

--- Page 348 ---
Set up a server for backend operations
 
What Facebook SDK component is associated with the
FBLoginButton for handling the login process?
  
FBSDKProfile
 
FBSDKAccessToken
 
FBSDKLoginManager
 
FBSDKShareDialog
 
What type of content can be shared using FBSDKShareKit in iOS
apps?
  
Only text
 
Text, images, videos, and links
 
Only images
 
Only videos
 

--- Page 349 ---
Which delegate method is commonly used to handle the result of a
content share with FBSDKShareKit in Swift?
  
func shareDialog(_ didCompleteWithResults: [AnyHashable: Any])
 
func shareButtonDidTap(_ button: FBSDKShareButton)
 
func shareDialog(_ didFailWithError: Error)
 
func sharer(_ sharer: FBSDKSharing, didCompleteWithResults
results: [String : Any])
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 350 ---
 
Answers
  
b
 
c
 
c
 
b
 
d
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 351 ---
CHAPTER 7
 
Creating Fitness Tracking App Using HealthKit
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 352 ---
 
Introduction
 
Embracing health and fitness has become an integral aspect of our
daily lives, and the market offers a plethora of applications aimed at
assisting individuals in better managing their well-being. Apple,
specifically for iOS, provides a dedicated framework known as
HealthKit, designed to enhance the monitoring of your health.
Integrating this framework into our applications can significantly
amplify its value. This chapter will help you understand HealthKit and
its practical applications. Furthermore, we will guide you through the
creation of a sample app, demonstrating how to effectively read data
from HealthKit and write data back to it. By the end of this chapter,
you will have a comprehensive understanding of how to leverage
HealthKit to its fullest potential for enhancing a health and fitness
app’s functionality.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 353 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Introduction to HealthKit
 
Applications of HealthKit
 
HealthKit Setup
 
User Interface Creation
 
Access Permission
 
Read Data Using HealthKit
 
Write Data Using HealthKit
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 354 ---
 
Introduction to HealthKit
 
HealthKit, a framework within the iOS ecosystem, represents a
groundbreaking initiative by Apple to transform the landscape of
health and fitness app development. As society places an increasing
emphasis on personal well-being, HealthKit emerges as a cornerstone
for app developers seeking to enhance user experiences in terms of
health management.
 
At its core, HealthKit serves as a hub, streamlining the aggregation and
organization of diverse health and fitness data from various sources.
This includes information related to physical activity, vital signs,
nutrition, and more. By providing a standardized and secure repository
for such data, HealthKit allows users to maintain a holistic view of
their health information, fostering a seamless flow of data across
different applications. One of the key advantages of HealthKit is its
ability to facilitate collaboration between health and fitness apps,
enabling them to share data and work in tandem. For developers, this
opens up possibilities for creating integrated solutions. Whether it is
tracking workouts, monitoring health metrics, or promoting healthy
habits, HealthKit offers a robust framework to support these
functionalities.
 

--- Page 355 ---
In this exploration of HealthKit, our journey will encompass an in-
depth examination of its features and functionalities. We will look into
the process of integrating HealthKit into applications, understanding
how to harness its capabilities to create user-centric health and fitness
experiences.
 
Following are few of the key features of HealthKit:
  
Data Collection and Retrieval: HealthKit acts as a centralized
repository for diverse health and fitness data, allowing applications to
collect and store information such as heart rate, step count, nutrition,
sleep patterns, and more. The framework provides a standardized
structure for organizing data, ensuring consistency and ease of use.
HealthKit enables applications to retrieve health data from the
centralized store, allowing for real-time monitoring and analysis. You
can access a wide range of health metrics and parameters, providing a
holistic view of the user’s well-being.
 
Interoperability: HealthKit promotes interoperability among health and
fitness apps, allowing them to share data seamlessly. This ensures a
seamless user experience by avoiding duplication of effort and data.
 
Privacy: The framework includes robust privacy features, requiring
user consent before accessing or sharing health data. Users have
granular control over which data they choose to share with specific
applications.

--- Page 356 ---
 
Activity Tracking: HealthKit supports the tracking of various physical
activities and workouts. Developers can integrate features that monitor
exercise routines, duration, and intensity. HealthKit seamlessly
integrates with sensors and fitness devices, allowing apps to capture
and utilize data from devices such as heart rate monitors,
smartwatches, and fitness trackers.
 
ResearchKit Integration: HealthKit collaborates with another Apple
framework, allowing you to create apps for medical research and
studies by utilizing health-related data from users who want to
participate.
 
The HealthKit framework in iOS supports various parameters and data
types to manage and access health-related information. Some key
parameters and data types include:
 
HKQuantityType and HKQuantity: These components are used to
represent quantity types, which quantify health-related data. For
example, you can use HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier:
.distanceWalkingRunning) to define a quantity type for heart rate. The
associated HKQuantity allows you to specify the actual numeric value
and unit for the data.
 

--- Page 357 ---
HKCharacteristicType: Characteristic types are used for representing
personal characteristics, such as date of birth, blood type, or biological
sex. For instance, you can use
HKObjectType.characteristicType(forIdentifier: .dateOfBirth) to
access the user’s date of birth.
 
HKCategoryType: This type is used for categorical data and is often
used for discrete values. An example is sleep analysis, where you
might use HKObjectType.categoryType(forIdentifier: .sleepAnalysis)
to represent sleep-related data with different categories.
 
HKWorkoutType: This type is designed specifically for workout or
exercise-related data. It encapsulates information about the type of
activity, duration, energy burned, and distance covered during a
workout. You can create a workout instance, such as
HKWorkout(activityType: .walking, start: startDate, end: endDate,
duration: 3600, totalEnergyBurned: energyBurned, totalDistance:
distance, metadata:
 
HKStatisticsQuery: This query allows developers to retrieve statistical
information, such as the sum, average, minimum, and maximum
values, for a given quantity type over a specific time period. For
example, you can use HKStatisticsQuery to calculate the average step
count over a certain period.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 358 ---
 
Applications of HealthKit
 
HealthKit has numerous applications; some of them are listed as
follows:
  
Health and Wellness Monitoring: Applications focused on overall
health and wellness leverage HealthKit to track and monitor essential
health metrics. This can include heart rate, activities, sleep patterns,
nutrition, and other personalized health data.
 
Seamless Integration with Applications: HealthKit seamlessly
integrates with various wearable devices, including smartwatches and
fitness trackers. This allows users to sync health and fitness data
between their devices and iOS apps, ensuring a unified and
synchronized experience. It also integrates with nutrition and diet apps
to track users’ dietary habits. It helps in managing calorie intake,
providing nutritional information, and provides a holistic approach to
health and nutrition.
 
Medical Research and Studies: HealthKit is employed in applications
designed for medical research and studies. By obtaining user consent,
researchers can collect health-related data from participants,
contributing to broader health studies and advancements.

--- Page 359 ---
 
Remote Patient Monitoring: HealthKit facilitates remote patient
monitoring applications. It enables the secure collection and sharing of
patient health data, allowing healthcare providers to monitor and
manage patients’ conditions remotely.
 
Emergency Information: HealthKit allows users to store critical health
information, such as allergies, critical medical history, and emergency
contacts. This information can be accessed even when the device is
locked, providing crucial details to first responders in case of
emergencies.
 
These represent only a handful of the possible applications of
HealthKit. In the following sections, we will look into the
development of a sample app that will showcase fundamental
HealthKit functionalities, including obtaining user authorization to
access information, reading data, and writing data to the HealthKit
framework.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 360 ---
 
HealthKit Setup
 
Let us get started by creating an iOS app using Xcode. After creating the
project, certain essential setup steps are required to integrate HealthKit.
Initially, we must enable our app to utilize HealthKit by including it in the
capabilities. Navigate to the project and select “Signing & Look for the
plus button in the top-left corner, as illustrated in Figure Click on it,
search for HealthKit, and add it to your project. Upon adding the
HealthKit capability, you should observe that the
HealthKitApp.entitlements file is added to in your project structure.
 
 
Figure 7.1: Add HealthKit Capability
 

--- Page 361 ---
Now, we need to incorporate specific settings into the info.plist file to
enable access to HealthKit later in the app. Navigate to the info.plist
within the project and include Privacy - Health Share Usage Description
and Privacy - Health Update Usage as shown in Figure Ensure that you
provide suitable description strings for these settings, as it is necessary to
request user permission for accessing HealthKit functionalities.
 
 
Figure 7.2: Info.plist settings
 
With the essential HealthKit setup now completed, the next step involves
crafting the user interface for the app. This interface will facilitate access
and presentation of HealthKit information. In the upcoming section, we
will look into the process of designing and implementing the user
interface.

--- Page 362 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 363 ---
 
User-Interface Creation
 
Regarding the User-Interface design, we will utilize the storyboard
approach in the project, as explained in Chapter 4, Building a To-Do List
Alternatively, you have the option to opt for a programmatic design, as
shown in the preceding Chapter 6, Integrating Social In the storyboard,
our initial configuration will include two screens. On the primary we will
incorporate three buttons and three labels through drag-and-drop, as
depicted in Figure These buttons will serve distinct purposes in
subsequent stages, such as authorizing HealthKit, reading data, and
writing data back to HealthKit. Simultaneously, the following three labels
will showcase the data retrieved from HealthKit. Make sure to layout
them using auto-layout constraints. You can refer to Chapter 4 for a
detailed explanation of auto layout.
 

--- Page 365 ---
 
Figure 7.3: UI for ViewController
 
Moving to the second our focus will be on designing it to facilitate the
writing of data to HealthKit. In this setup, we will introduce two textfields
along with corresponding labels that describe the purpose of each
textfield, as shown in Figure Additionally, a submit button will be
incorporated, and upon clicking it, the entered data for height and weight
will be submitted to HealthKit. This design ensures a clear interface for
users to input information, understand the purpose of each element, and
seamlessly submit data to HealthKit.
 

--- Page 367 ---
 
Figure 7.4: Write Data UI
 
Furthermore, we will establish a connection between the first
ViewController and the second one upon clicking the Write Data button.
To achieve this, simply perform a control drag from the button to the
second This action will prompt a menu to appear, as illustrated in Figure
From the menu, choose which will configure the app to present the second
ViewController when users click the Write Data button. This seamless
connection ensures a smooth transition between the two
 

--- Page 368 ---
 
Figure 7.5: Present ViewController Setup
 
Moving forward, let us generate a new Viewcontroller by navigating to
File -> New -> New selecting Cocoa Touch and naming it It is crucial to
establish a connection between the ViewController classes in the
storyboard and this newly created file to ensure seamless integration. This
step ensures that the functionalities and design elements you set up in the

--- Page 369 ---
storyboard are effectively linked with the logic and behavior defined in
the WriteDataViewController file.
 
For the initial establish a connection with Subsequently, proceed to
establish the essential connections for the buttons and labels incorporated
in the storyboard. Within the create outlets for the labels as follows:
 
@IBOutlet weak var stepValue: UILabel!
@IBOutlet weak var distanceValue: UILabel!
@IBOutlet weak var calorieValue: UILabel!
 
Furthermore, we will create actions for the “Authorize HealthKit” and
“Read HealthKit” buttons as follows:
 
@IBAction func authorizeHealthkit(_ sender: Any) {
}
 
@IBAction func readHealthkitData(_ sender: Any) {
}
 
We will omit the action for the “Write Data” button since we have already
configured the presentation of the view controller from the storyboard
upon button click. We will add the logic to these button actions at a later
stage.
 
Proceed to the WriteDataViewController and establish outlets for the
textfields as demonstrated:

--- Page 370 ---
 
@IBOutlet weak var heightTextField: UITextField!
@IBOutlet weak var weightTextField: UITextField!
 
Additionally, create an action for the submit button:
 
@IBAction func submitClick(_ sender: Any) {
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 371 ---
 
Access Permission
 
To obtain permission from users for accessing HealthKit data, we will
create a new Swift file named This Swift file serves as a centralized
place for consolidating all HealthKit-related code, ensuring an
organized and streamlined approach to handling HealthKit
functionalities throughout the application.
 
Firstly, we will import HealthKit to this class:
 
import Foundation
import HealthKit
 
class HealthkitSetup {
}
 
Next, we will add the code where the function requests user
authorization to access specific health data types using the HealthKit
framework.
 
1. let healthStore = HKHealthStore()
2. func authorizeHealthKit(completion: @escaping (Bool) -> Void) {
3. guard HKHealthStore.isHealthDataAvailable() else {

--- Page 372 ---
4. completion(false)
5. return
6. }
7. guard
8. let height = HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier: .height),
9. let weight = HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier: .bodyMass),
10. let distance = HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier:
.distanceWalkingRunning),
11. let stepCount = HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier:
.stepCount),
12. let activeEnergy = HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier:
.activeEnergyBurned) else {
13. completion(false)
14. return
15. }
16. let typesToWrite: Set = [height,
17. weight]
18. let typesToRead: Set = [distance,
19. stepCount,
20. activeEnergy]
21. healthStore.requestAuthorization(toShare: typesToWrite,
22. read: typesToRead) { (success, error) in
23. completion(success)
24. }
25. }
  

--- Page 373 ---
Line We create an instance of This object is central to HealthKit
interactions and serves as a gateway for requesting authorization,
reading, and writing health-related data.
 
Line We create a function which is designed to request authorization
from the user to access HealthKit data. It takes a completion handler as
a parameter, which is a closure that will be called upon the completion
of the authorization request.
 
Line 3 checks if HealthKit data is available on the device. If HealthKit
is not available, the function calls the completion handler with false
and exits.
 
Line We check if certain HealthKit data types, such as height, weight,
distance, step count, and active energy, can be accessed. We are using
these specific types to read and write. But you can add various other
data types to the HealthKit framework. If any of these types are
unavailable, the function calls the completion handler with false and
exits the function.
 
Next, we will create a set of indicating the types of health data that the
app intends to write. In this case, it includes height and weight.
 
Next, we will create another set of specifying the types of health data
that the app intends to read. This includes distance, step count, and

--- Page 374 ---
active energy.
 
Next, we call the requestAuthorization method using the healthStore
object to request user authorization to write the specified types of data
and read the specified types of data We will get the result of the
authorization request provided in the closure, where the success
parameter indicates whether the authorization was successful.
 
Let us head to ViewController and add the call to the
authorizeHealthKit on the button:
 
@IBAction func authorizeHealthkit(_ sender: Any) {
HealthkitSetup().authorizeHealthKit { (success) in
guard success else {
print(“HealthKit Authorization Failed”)
return
}
print(“HealthKit Successfully Authorized”)
}
}
 
Now, let us run the app and check if you get the authorization for
HealthKit on the button click, as shown in Figure Make sure you allow
all the access permissions, as we will need to access them later in the
app.

--- Page 375 ---
 

--- Page 378 ---
 
Figure 7.6: Authorize HealthKit
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 379 ---
 
Read Data Using HealthKit
 
Our goal is to retrieve data stored in HealthKit, including information
such as the number of steps, distance walked, and calories burned
throughout the day. However, since we are currently working in a
simulator environment rather than on a physical device, we need to
simulate this data. To achieve this, we will input dummy data into the
Health app on the simulator, and our application will then access and
utilize this simulated data. To input dummy data into the Health app,
launch the Health app on the simulator and go to the “Browse” option
within the app. Search for and upon selecting it, you will find an
option to add data in the top right corner, as illustrated in Figure
Include dummy data for steps and save the input. Similarly, input data
for walking+running distance and Active Energy by searching for
these metrics in the “Browse” menu.
 

--- Page 382 ---
 
Figure 7.7: Dummy Health Data Setup
 
Now that we have done the dummy data setup, head back to our
HealthKit project, navigate to the HealthkitSetup file, and add the
following code to read the data:
 
1.  func readHealthkitData(for sampleType: HKQuantityType,
completion: @escaping (HKQuantity?) -> Void) {
2.         let now = Date()
3.         let startOfDay = Calendar.current.startOfDay(for: now)
4.         let predicate = HKQuery.predicateForSamples(
5.             withStart: startOfDay,
6.             end: now,
7.             options: .strictStartDate
8.         )
9.         let query = HKStatisticsQuery(
10.             quantityType: sampleType,
11.             quantitySamplePredicate: predicate,
12.             options: .cumulativeSum
13.         ) { _, result, _ in
14.             guard let result = result, let sum = result.sumQuantity() else
{
15.                 completion(nil)
16.                 return
17.             }

--- Page 383 ---
18.             DispatchQueue.main.async {
19.                 completion(sum)
20.             }
21.         }
22.         healthStore.execute(query)
23.     }
 
Now, let us look into the code. In this implementation, a method has
been created to read any form of cumulative data for the current day.
Notably, we have explicitly specified the HKQuantityType within this
method.
  
Line We obtain the current date and the start of the current day.
 
Next, we create a predicate to define the time range for which we want
to retrieve HealthKit data. We will cover the time from the start of the
day to the current time.
 
Line It creates HKStatisticsQuery to calculate the cumulative sum of
the specified quantity type within the defined time range. We will be
passing the steps, distance and calories quantity type later to this
method.
 
Next, we check if the query result and the sum quantity are valid. If
not, it calls the completion handler and exits from the function.

--- Page 384 ---
Otherwise, if the sum is valid, it executes the completion handler on
the main thread, providing the sum quantity.
 
Line We execute the query using the healthStore instance, initiating the
retrieval of HealthKit data.
 
Now let us navigate to the ViewController.swift file and import the
HealthKit framework to begin with. Next, add the following code to
readHealthkitData method:
 
1.  @IBAction func readHealthkitData(_ sender: Any) {
2.         guard let stepsCountSample =
HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier: .stepCount) else {
3.             return
4.         }
5.         guard let distanceSample =
HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier: .distanceWalkingRunning)
else {
6.             return
7.         }
8.         guard let calorieSample =
HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier: .activeEnergyBurned) else
{
9.             return
10.         }

--- Page 385 ---
11.         HealthkitSetup().readHealthkitData(for: stepsCountSample,
completion: { (data) in
12.             guard let steps = data else {
13.                 return
14.             }
15.           self.stepValue.text = “Steps - \(steps.doubleValue(for:
HKUnit.count()))”
16.         })
17.         HealthkitSetup().readHealthkitData(for: distanceSample,
completion: { (data) in
18.             guard let distance = data else {
19.                 return
20.             }
21.         self.distanceValue.text = “Distance - \
(distance.doubleValue(for:
HKUnit.mile()).rounded(.toNearestOrAwayFromZero)) mi”
22.         })
23.         HealthkitSetup().readHealthkitData(for: calorieSample,
completion: { (data) in
24.             guard let calories = data else {
25.                 return
26.             }
27.             self.calorieValue.text = “Calories - \
(calories.doubleValue(for:
HKUnit.kilocalorie()).rounded(.toNearestOrAwayFromZero)) kcal”
28.         })
29.     }

--- Page 386 ---
 
In this method, we create different HKObjectType to access their data
from the HealthKit. Let us break down the code and understand it
stepwise
  
Line The guard statement attempts to create an HKObjectType for step
count. If successful, the stepsCountSample constant is set to this value;
otherwise, it exits the function. Similarly, we will also create
HKObjectType for distanceSample and
 
Line We call readHealthkitData method from the HealthkitSetup class
to read HealthKit data for steps count. The completion handler updates
the UI with the retrieved data. Similarly, we call the readHealthkitData
to retrieve distance and calories and update the UI accordingly.
 
When you run the application and select the “Read HealthKit” button,
the screen should display the dummy data previously added in the
Health app, as depicted in Figure Data from HealthKit is now
accessible.
 

--- Page 389 ---
 
Figure 7.8: Read HealthKit
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 390 ---
 
Write Data Using HealthKit
 
Having successfully retrieved data from HealthKit, we now find
ourselves at the final phase of the app, where we will proceed to write
the height and weight information to the HealthKit framework.
Navigate to HealthkitSetup and create a method as follows:
 
1. func writeHealthkitData(height: Double, weight: Double,
completion: @escaping (Bool) -> Void) {
2.         let date = Date()
3.         if let heighttype = HKSampleType.quantityType(forIdentifier:
HKQuantityTypeIdentifier.height) {
4.             let heightvalue = HKQuantity(unit: HKUnit.inch(),
doubleValue: height)
5.             let heightdata = HKQuantitySample(type: heighttype,
quantity: heightvalue, start: date, end: date)
6.             healthStore.save(heightdata, withCompletion: { (success,
error) in
7.                 print(“Saved Height”)
8.             })
9.         }
10.         if let weighttype =
HKSampleType.quantityType(forIdentifier:
HKQuantityTypeIdentifier.bodyMass) {

--- Page 391 ---
11.             let weightvalue = HKQuantity(unit: HKUnit.pound(),
doubleValue: weight)
12.             let weightdata = HKQuantitySample(type: weighttype,
quantity: weightvalue, start: date, end: date)
13.             healthStore.save(weightdata, withCompletion: { (success,
error) in
14.                 DispatchQueue.main.async {
15.                     completion(success)
16.                 }
17.                 print(“Saved Weight”)
18.             })
19.         }
20.     }
 
This function is responsible for writing height and weight data to the
HealthKit framework. We will pass the height and weight parameters
to this function from the user input.
  
Firstly, we will retrieve the current date, which will be used as the start
and end date for the HealthKit data samples.
 
Line It checks if the height data type is available in HealthKit.
 
Line This creates an HKQuantity object for height using inches as the
unit.

--- Page 392 ---
 
Next, we create HKQuantitySample for height with the specified
quantity, start date, and end date.
 
Line We save the height data to HealthKit, and on completion, we print
the message.
 
Next, we follow the similar steps to save the weight-related data. Upon
completion, the completion handler is called on the main thread with
the success status.
 
Now, let us move to the WriteDataViewController and incorporate the
code to call this function. Insert the following code within the submit
button click event:
 
1. @IBAction func submitClick(_ sender: Any) {
2.         if heightTextField.text != “” && weightTextField.text != “” {
3.             guard let heightvalue = heightTextField.text else {
4.                 return
5.             }
6.             guard let height = Double(heightvalue) else {
7.                 return
8.             }
9.
10.             guard let weightvalue = weightTextField.text else {

--- Page 393 ---
11.                 return
12.             }
13.             guard let weight = Double(weightvalue) else {
14.                 return
15.             }
16.             HealthkitSetup().writeHealthkitData(height: height, weight:
weight, completion: { (success) in
17.                 guard success else {
18.                     return
19.                 }
20.                 self.showAlert(message: “Data saved successfully”)
21.             })
22.         }
23.         else {
24.             self.showAlert(message: “Enter height and weight values”)
25.         }
26.    }
 
Following is the explanation of the aforementioned code:
  
Firstly, we check if both the height and weight textfields have non-
empty values.
 
Then, we safely unwrap the text entered in the height textfield and
convert it into a double in line 6.
 

--- Page 394 ---
Similarly, we access the value from the weight textfield and convert it
to a double as shown in line 14.
 
Line It calls the writeHealthkitData method from the HealthkitSetup
class to write the height and weight data to HealthKit. The completion
handler is executed with the success status, and if successful, it
displays an alert with a success message.
 
Line If either the height or weight textfields are empty, it displays an
alert prompting the user to enter both height and weight values. We
will also add the following method to display the alert:
 
func showAlert(message: String) {
let alertController = UIAlertController(title: “”, message: message,
preferredStyle: .alert)
alertController.addAction(UIAlertAction(title: “Ok”, style: .default,
handler: nil))
present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil)
}
 
This function simply accepts a message input and presents an alert to
the user.
 
Let us proceed to run the app and attempt to input data for both height
and weight.
 

--- Page 395 ---
You should see the success message for submitting the appropriate
values, as shown in Figure To check if the values are actually stored in
the HealthKit, you can head to the health app on the simulator where
we saved the data earlier and check for height and weight values from
the browse section.
 

--- Page 398 ---
 
Figure 7.9: Write Data
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 399 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we explored the HealthKit framework, beginning with
an insightful introduction and a closer examination of key HealthKit
parameters. Further, we explored the diverse applications of HealthKit,
shedding light on its versatile functionalities. Moving from theory to
practical implementation, we navigated through the steps of setting up
the HealthKit framework within our application.
 
The journey continued as we looked into crafting the user interface for
our application, ensuring a seamless and engaging experience for
users. We also looked into the process of obtaining user permissions
for HealthKit, a crucial step in ensuring privacy and compliance.
 
The practical aspects of our exploration included the extraction of
valuable health data, such as step count, distance, and calories, directly
from the HealthKit framework. Moreover, we looked into writing user-
centric information, such as height and weight, back into the HealthKit
repository.
 
In essence, this chapter served as a comprehensive guide to both
theoretical insights into HealthKit and practical knowledge for its
seamless integration into an iOS application. From conceptual

--- Page 400 ---
understanding to hands-on implementation, we navigated through the
fundamentals of HealthKit. HealthKit offers numerous possibilities for
integration into your health and fitness applications. Feel free to
unleash your creativity and explore diverse ways to make the most of
its functionalities.
 
In the upcoming chapter, we will look into another iOS framework
known as Core ML and VisionKit, promising a more enjoyable
exploration.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 401 ---
 
References
  
HealthKit https://developer.apple.com/documentation/healthkit
 
https://github.com/ava-orange-education/iOS-App-Development-
Projects-Handbook
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 402 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
Which function is commonly used to request user authorization for
accessing HealthKit data?
  
requestHealthAuthorization()
 
authorizeHealthKitAccess()
 
requestAuthorization(toShare:read:)
 
grantHealthAccess()
 
What is HealthKit?
  
A fitness tracking device
 
An iOS framework for health and fitness apps
 
A nutrition tracking app
 

--- Page 403 ---
A medical diagnosis tool
 
When using HealthKit, what is the purpose of the
HKObjectType.quantityType(forIdentifier: .stepCount)?
  
Requesting user authorization
 
Representing a data type for reading steps
 
Writing step count data to HealthKit
 
Checking device compatibility
 
What is the primary purpose of the HKStatisticsQuery in HealthKit?
  
Requesting user permission
 
Writing data to HealthKit
 
Retrieving statistical information for a given quantity type
 
Authorizing HealthKit access
 
Which method is commonly used to save data to HealthKit, such as
saving a quantity sample for steps?

--- Page 404 ---
  
writeHealthKitData()
 
saveData(to:type:completion:)
 
save(quantitySample:completion:)
 
addData(toHealthKit:)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 405 ---
 
Answers
  
c
 
b
 
b
 
c
 
c
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 406 ---
CHAPTER 8
 
Building an Image Recognition App Using Core ML and VisionKit
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 407 ---
 
Introduction
 
With the growing popularity of machine learning, there has been a
surge in the development of diverse applications harnessing its
capabilities. Recognizing the significance of integrating machine
learning seamlessly, Apple has introduced the Core ML framework for
iOS. This framework offers developers a streamlined approach to
incorporate machine learning functionalities into their applications. In
this chapter, we will explore Core ML, look into its features,
functionalities, and practical application. We will also explore the
Vision framework, another powerful tool by Apple. The Vision
framework opens up possibilities for advanced image analysis and
computer vision applications. We will use the Vision framework to
guide the creation of a practical and illustrative image classification
application. This hands-on approach aims to provide valuable insights
into Core ML and the Vision framework, contributing to a holistic
understanding of machine learning on the iOS platform.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 408 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Understanding Machine Learning
 
Introduction to Core ML
 
Introduction to Vision Framework
 
Creating a Sample Image Classification App
 
Initiating ImagePicker
 
Image classification
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 409 ---
 
Understanding Machine learning
 
Machine learning enables computers to learn from examples and
experiences, mimicking human decision-making without explicit
programming. It falls under Artificial Intelligence, using algorithms to
learn from data, identify patterns, and uncover hidden insights. This
approach allows systems to adapt and improve over time, making
predictions and decisions based on evolving information.
 
The essence of machine learning lies in its ability to adapt and improve
over time, refining its decision-making capabilities as it encounters
new information. By dynamically adjusting its parameters based on
patterns identified in the data, machine learning algorithms can make
predictions, classifications, and decisions with increasing accuracy.
This paradigm shift in computing is marked as moving away from
traditional rule-based programming, allowing systems to evolve and
enhance their performance in response to evolving circumstances.
 
There exists a vast array of machine learning algorithms, numbering in
the tens of thousands, which can be categorized based on learning style
or the nature of the problems they address. Nevertheless, regardless of
the algorithm’s specific nature, every machine learning model
comprises several essential components:

--- Page 410 ---
  
Training Data: The training data in machine learning constitutes
textual content, images, videos, or time series information essential for
the system’s learning process. Usually labeled to signify the accurate
answer, this data is instrumental in shaping the model’s understanding.
 
For instance, in image recognition, the training data might consist of
labeled images distinguishing between cats and dogs. The system
learns to associate visual features with the correct classification.
Similarly, in weather prediction, historical data indicating actual
weather conditions serves as training data. The machine learning
system utilizes this labeled information to distinguish patterns and
make accurate predictions when exposed to new and unseen data.
 
Representation: Representation involves encoding objects within
training data to facilitate the learning process. The ease with which
encoding occurs can differ significantly across models, influencing the
selection of an appropriate model for a given task. For example,
consider the task of recognizing handwritten digits. A traditional
representation might involve manually extracting features such as the
curvature of specific strokes. Contrastingly, modern approaches,
particularly those employing neural networks, have the ability to
automatically learn and extract relevant features from raw data,
eliminating the need for explicit manual encoding. The choice between
different representations plays a pivotal role in the success of a
machine learning model.

--- Page 411 ---
 
Evaluation: The evaluation aspect of machine learning revolves around
the assessment and prioritization of one model over another.
Commonly referred to as a utility function, loss function, or scoring
function, this crucial element serves as a yardstick for gauging the
model’s performance. For instance, consider the task of predicting
housing prices based on various features. The evaluation process might
involve using a mean absolute error metric, which measures the
average absolute differences between the predicted and actual prices.
These evaluation metrics are indispensable for fine-tuning and
selecting models that best align with the specific requirements of a
given task. Whether minimizing mean squared error or maximizing
likelihood, the choice of evaluation function is linked to the success of
the machine learning model in solving real-world problems.
 
Optimization: Optimization is a critical process that involves
navigating the space of represented models or refining the labels in the
training data to enhance overall performance. This process is
instrumental in fine-tuning the model for better evaluations. For
example, consider a speech recognition system. During optimization,
the model parameters are adjusted to minimize the difference between
the predicted and actual transcriptions of spoken words. This iterative
process, often guided by sophisticated optimization algorithms, aims to
minimize the value of the loss function. As a result, the model
becomes more accurate over time, improving its ability to correctly
transcribe spoken words and thereby optimizing its performance.

--- Page 412 ---
 
In essence, these fundamental components collectively contribute to
the construction, training, and evaluation of machine learning
algorithms, allowing them to learn patterns and make predictions from
diverse datasets. Refer to Figure 8.1 for the flow of the data training
process.
 

--- Page 413 ---
 

--- Page 414 ---
Figure 8.1: Data training process
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 415 ---
 
Introduction to Core ML
 
Core ML is a framework developed by Apple that empowers
developers to integrate machine learning models seamlessly into their
iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS applications. Introduced in 2017,
Core ML serves as a bridge between the power of machine learning
and the user-friendly Apple ecosystem, allowing for the creation of
intelligent and context-aware applications.
 
Some of the key features of Core ML includes:
  
Integrating machine learning becomes user-friendly with Core ML.
Developers benefit from the ease with which Core ML allows the
integration of machine learning models. This seamless integration
expedites the development process, enabling the creation of
sophisticated applications without the complexity often associated with
incorporating advanced AI capabilities.
 
Versatility: Core ML exhibits remarkable versatility by
accommodating a wide spectrum of machine learning models. This
flexibility empowers developers to seamlessly integrate diverse models
into their applications, thereby broadening the range of functionalities.

--- Page 416 ---
For example, a developer can effortlessly incorporate a pre-trained
image classification model, enabling an iOS app to proficiently
recognize objects in both photos and real-time camera feeds. We will
be looking into this in the sample app that we create in the later
section. This capability extends the utility of Core ML across various
domains, making it a dynamic tool for crafting applications with
diverse machine learning requirements.
 
Privacy and Security: Core ML prioritizes user privacy with on-device
processing. Within the context of a face recognition app, Core ML
executes facial analysis directly on the user’s device. This local
processing ensures that sensitive facial features are handled securely
without any need for the data to leave the confines of the user’s device.
By prioritizing on-device processing, Core ML not only enhances user
privacy but also instills confidence in users that their sensitive
information remains under their control and protected from external
access. This user-centric privacy approach aligns seamlessly with the
broader commitment to security and trust within the Apple ecosystem.
 
Optimized Performance: Core ML harnesses the power of hardware
acceleration to guarantee high-performance execution, ensuring that
machine learning tasks are processed efficiently. This optimization is
particularly impactful in scenarios demanding real-time
responsiveness. For instance, take an example of a real-time language
translation app powered by Core ML. In this scenario, the framework
rapidly processes and translates spoken words, delivering users instant

--- Page 417 ---
and efficient translations. The utilization of hardware acceleration
ensures that the app operates seamlessly, providing a responsive
experience for users seeking on-the-fly language translation
capabilities. This shows how Core ML’s commitment to performance
optimization enhances the functionality of applications in real-world
scenarios.
 
Supports Multiple Tasks: Core ML supports an extensive range of
tasks. From image recognition to sentiment analysis, Core ML can
help you build a wide range of applications. Imagine an application
designed for understanding and analyzing text sentiment. In this
scenario, Core ML proves instrumental in deciphering the emotional
tone embedded in written content. Users can utilize this functionality
to gain insights into the sentiment of text, whether it be in social media
posts, customer reviews, or other textual forms. This shows how Core
ML’s versatility extends beyond image recognition or other specific
domains, making it a versatile tool for a wide spectrum of machine
learning applications.
 
Continual Improvement: Apple’s commitment to innovation
guarantees that Core ML remains at the forefront of technological
advancements. Envision a scenario where a virtual personal assistant
within an application undergoes continual enhancement through Core
ML updates. Take an example of the virtual assistant consistently
refining its understanding of user requests. This ongoing learning
process empowers the assistant to become more intuitive and

--- Page 418 ---
responsive over time. Through regular updates, Core ML ensures that
the machine learning models underpinning the virtual assistant are
equipped with the latest techniques and insights, ultimately
contributing to a dynamic and continuously improving user
experience. Apple’s dedication to innovation is evident not only in the
initial capabilities of Core ML but also in its ongoing evolution,
ensuring users benefit from cutting-edge advancements in the field of
machine learning.
 
Core ML’s seamless integration, versatility, optimized performance,
focus on privacy, support for various tasks, and commitment to
continual improvement make it a cornerstone for developers looking to
infuse their applications with intelligent, context-aware features in the
space of machine learning.
 
Let’s look into some of the key classes provided by Core ML:
 
At the heart of Core ML models lies the essential class known as This
class represents a compiled and ready-to-use machine learning model
within the Core ML framework. Its primary purpose is to provide a
versatile foundation that allows developers to load, instantiate, and
effectively integrate machine learning models into their applications.
By leveraging instances of the MLModel class, developers can
seamlessly incorporate the predictive capabilities of machine learning
into their app’s functionality. The process involves the creation of
instances by loading specific model files, thereby unlocking the
potential of machine learning within the application’s ecosystem.

--- Page 419 ---
 
MLModelConfiguration class assumes a pivotal role by providing a
spectrum of configuration options during the loading of a machine
learning model. One noteworthy capability of MLModelConfiguration
is its capacity to fine-tune the optimization of a model based on
specific use-case requirements. For instance, developers can opt to
configure whether the model should prioritize real-time responsiveness
or focus on maximizing predictive accuracy. This level of
customization ensures that the machine learning model aligns precisely
with the performance expectations dictated by the demands of the
application.
 
The MLModelDescription class plays a pivotal role in offering a
comprehensive understanding of the metadata and properties
associated with a machine learning model. This class serves as an
informational hub, furnishing details about crucial aspects such as
model inputs, outputs, and additional metadata. By encapsulating these
insights, MLModelDescription becomes an invaluable tool for
developers seeking a deeper understanding of the structural
components and characteristics of a machine learning model. This
wealth of information equips developers with the knowledge necessary
for effective utilization and integration of the model within their
applications.
 
MLFeatureValue class serves a major role in the process of
transmitting input values to the model, thereby facilitating the

--- Page 420 ---
predictive capabilities of the machine learning system.
 
In practical terms, MLFeatureValue acts as a conduit, allowing
developers to pass diverse input values to the model. These values are
then utilized by the machine learning model to make accurate
predictions. This class encapsulates the essential data elements
required for the model to analyze and generate meaningful outcomes,
forming a vital link in the interaction between an application and its
integrated machine learning model.
 
This class enables developers to conduct predictions efficiently on
batches of input data, rather than processing one input at a time. This
capability proves highly beneficial when optimizing performance for
applications dealing with multiple data samples. The essence of
MLBatchProvider lies in its ability to streamline the prediction process
by handling data in batches. This approach significantly enhances
performance, especially in scenarios where applications need to
process numerous data samples concurrently. Whether dealing with
image recognition, natural language processing, or any other machine
learning task, the use of MLBatchProvider contributes to an optimized
prediction workflow, ultimately improving the overall efficiency of the
machine learning implementation within the application.
 
MLPredictionOptions offers developers a nuanced toolkit for refining
the prediction process with a machine learning model. This class

--- Page 421 ---
empowers developers with a range of configurable options, enabling
them to fine-tune various settings to achieve optimal performance. One
notable feature of MLPredictionOptions is its ability to specify
hardware preferences, such as choosing between CPU or GPU for
inference. This level of customization proves instrumental in tailoring
the prediction process to the specific capabilities and requirements of
the underlying hardware. Beyond hardware selection, developers can
explore additional settings, ensuring a flexible and adaptable approach
to making predictions. MLPredictionOptions provides a
comprehensive set of controls, allowing developers to optimize and
customize the prediction pipeline based on the unique needs of their
application. Whether prioritizing computational speed, resource
utilization, or other considerations, this class equips developers with
the tools needed to achieve precise and efficient predictions with their
machine learning models.
 
MLDictionaryFeatureProvider classes assume critical roles in the
preparatory phase of making predictions with machine learning
models. This class is specifically designed to facilitate the creation of
feature providers from dictionaries, serving as essential tools in the
data preparation process.
 
MLImageConstraint and These constraint classes offer a range of
configurable options, including the ability to set minimum and
maximum image dimensions. By using these options, developers can
ensure that the images provided as input align with the expected
specifications of the model. This level of customization proves
invaluable when dealing with diverse image datasets, allowing for a

--- Page 422 ---
more controlled and tailored input, ultimately enhancing the model’s
ability to generate accurate predictions.
 
MLUpdateContext emerges as a crucial component within Core ML,
serving as a dedicated class for managing the process of updating
machine learning models. The class encapsulates details about the new
model, encompassing the updates or modifications applied during the
update process. This includes the model’s structure, parameters, and
any enhancements made to improve its performance. Beyond the
model itself, MLUpdateContext also accommodates associated
metadata. This metadata may include information about the training
data, model versioning, or any other relevant details that provide
context to the changes made during the update. By offering a
consolidated view of the update process, MLUpdateContext facilitates
a more organized and coordinated approach to managing model
updates. Developers can gain insights into the impact of changes,
ensuring a smoother transition between different versions of the
machine learning model.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 423 ---
 
Introduction to Vision Framework
 
Apple’s Vision framework, a dynamic and versatile toolkit, has been
crafted to deliver cutting-edge computer vision capabilities to
applications within the Apple ecosystem. This empowering framework
allows developers across iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS to
effortlessly incorporate advanced features like image and face analysis,
along with text recognition, enriching the visual intelligence of their
applications.
 
Key Aspects of the Vision Framework:
  
Image Analysis: Vision framework excels in image analysis, providing
developers with tools to process and interpret visual information.
Vision framework incorporates robust face detection algorithms,
enabling applications to precisely identify and locate faces within
images. This capability is foundational for applications requiring facial
recognition or analysis. The Vision framework extends its prowess to
object tracking, allowing applications to seamlessly monitor and
follow the movement of objects within a visual field. This feature is
particularly valuable in scenarios where tracking the trajectory of
objects is essential. Vision framework enables applications to
categorize and identify objects, scenes, or individuals within images.

--- Page 424 ---
This facilitates a deeper understanding of image content and enhances
the application’s responsiveness.
 
Text Recognition: The Vision framework takes a significant stride
forward with its specialized text recognition capabilities, providing
applications with the means to extract and interpret text seamlessly
from images. Vision framework facilitates document scanning by
extracting textual information from images. This is particularly
beneficial for applications that require users to scan and digitize
documents using their device’s camera. Leveraging text recognition,
applications can offer language translation features. Users can capture
text in one language through the camera, and the application interprets
and translates it into their preferred language. The Vision framework
contributes to accessibility by reading text aloud. For users with visual
impairments or those who prefer auditory assistance, this feature
ensures that textual content within images is vocalized, enhancing
overall accessibility.
 
Machine Learning Integration: Within the Vision framework, a
seamless integration with Core ML empowers developers to
incorporate machine learning models seamlessly into their vision-
related tasks. We will be using this in our application. The
collaboration between the Vision framework and Core ML establishes
a unified framework where machine learning seamlessly coexists with
other vision functionalities. This environment simplifies the

--- Page 425 ---
development process. Developers benefit from this integration by
gaining access to a diverse set of pre-trained machine learning models
through Core ML within the Vision framework. These pre-trained
models serve as powerful tools, allowing applications to leverage
established algorithms without the need for extensive training. The
integration goes beyond pre-trained models, offering developers the
flexibility to train custom models tailored to the specific requirements
of their vision-based applications. This customization empowers
developers to fine-tune models, enhancing accuracy and adaptability to
suit unique use cases.
 
Real-time Processing: Designed for real-time performance, the Vision
framework takes advantage of device hardware to deliver efficient
image processing. This ensures that vision-based features in
applications, such as augmented reality experiences or live camera
analysis, operate smoothly and responsively. The architecture of the
Vision framework prioritizes speed, ensuring that image processing
tasks occur with minimal latency. This optimization is crucial for
applications demanding real-time responses, such as those engaged in
augmented reality experiences. By harnessing the computational
power of the device, it enhances the speed and efficiency of image
processing, contributing to a seamless and responsive user experience.
The real-time processing capabilities shine in applications featuring
augmented reality experiences or live camera analysis. Whether
overlaying virtual elements in real-time or providing instantaneous
insights through camera feeds, the Vision framework ensures that these
features operate smoothly and responsively.

--- Page 426 ---
 
Accessibility Vision framework contributes to enhancing accessibility
by providing features like image description and face recognition. This
makes visual content more accessible to users with varying needs,
creating a more inclusive user experience. Vision framework
incorporates image description capabilities, enriching the user
experience by providing textual narrations of visual content. This
feature is particularly beneficial for users with visual impairments,
ensuring they can perceive and understand the content of images
through descriptive text. The inclusion of face recognition features
adds another layer of accessibility. By recognizing and describing
faces within images, the Vision framework ensures that users,
especially those with visual impairments, can comprehend the visual
context and identify individuals in their surroundings. The Vision
framework’s commitment to accessibility aligns with the principles of
universal design, emphasizing the creation of applications that cater to
a diverse user base.
 
Privacy: In its commitment to safeguarding user privacy, the Vision
framework employs a privacy-centric approach by conducting image
analysis directly on the user’s device. This strategic choice minimizes
the necessity for sensitive data to traverse external networks or cloud
services, accentuating the framework’s dedication to user security. The
on-device processing paradigm not only protects user privacy but also
enhances overall security measures. By confining sensitive image

--- Page 427 ---
analysis tasks to the local device, potential vulnerabilities associated
with data transmission are minimized, contributing to a more robust
security infrastructure.
 
The Vision framework in iOS offers a variety of classes that
developers can use to implement advanced computer vision features
seamlessly into their applications. Here are some key classes within
the Vision framework:
  
This class is an abstract base class for all requests in the Vision
framework. It defines the common interface for different types of
requests. VNRequest is designed as an abstract base class, providing a
blueprint for specific request types within the Vision framework. As an
abstraction, it defines essential characteristics and behaviors common
to all request subclasses. One of its primary functions is to establish a
common interface that all Vision requests adhere to. Being an abstract
class, it encapsulates the generic features and functionalities shared by
different types of requests. This design allows developers to create and
extend specific request types.
 
It’s an abstract base class for image-based requests within the Vision
framework. As the name suggests, this class centers its design around
the processing and analysis of images. It encapsulates the common
functionalities required for various image-based tasks, ensuring
consistency in handling diverse visual data. Specific requests, like face
detection or text recognition, extend from this class. Specific image-

--- Page 428 ---
based requests, such as those for face detection or text recognition,
extend from this class.
 
This class is specifically tailored for image classification. Its primary
function is to enable machine learning models to classify an image,
pinpointing objects and assigning them to predefined categories.
Imagine an application designed for plant enthusiasts. By
incorporating the app can allow users to capture images of various
plants. The request, powered by a trained machine learning model,
then precisely identifies the plant species and categorizes them
accordingly.
 
This class serves as a gateway to understanding the outcomes of image
classification, offering detailed information about the identified object
or category. It includes not only the label of the recognized entity but
also additional details such as confidence levels associated with each
classification.
 
This class is essential for handling image analysis requests, It allows
you to process images through the Vision framework. It acts as a
bridge between the input images and the various analysis tasks,
making it a central component in many vision applications. We will
look into the practical use of this class in our image recognition app.
 
This class is built for the task of detecting faces within an image. Its
specialization ensures a focused and efficient approach to facial feature

--- Page 429 ---
identification, making it a vital asset for applications centered around
people-centric interactions. The primary functionality of this request
lies in providing detailed information about the detected faces. It
furnishes precise data regarding the location of each face within the
image, offering coordinates that denote the position of facial features.
Additionally, it supplies information about the size of each detected
face.
 
VNFaceObservation encapsulates the outcome of face detection,
serving as a robust container for the wealth of information derived
from analyzing facial features within an image. Its role extends beyond
face detection, fostering an understanding of each detected face.
VNFaceObservation goes a step further by furnishing detailed
information about key facial features. These landmarks include critical
points such as the eyes, nose, and mouth. Take an example of an
application designed to recognize user emotions. By utilizing
VNFaceObservation, the app can precisely determine the position of
each user’s face and identify key facial features. This information
becomes invaluable for accurately gauging facial expressions,
contributing to a more responsive and emotionally intelligent user
experience.
 
This class is built for the purpose of recognizing and extracting text
from images. One of the primary applications of
VNRecognizeTextRequest lies in OCR. It excels in deciphering
characters, words, and paragraphs within images, transforming them

--- Page 430 ---
into machine-readable text. Whether it’s extracting information from
document images, recognizing text in street signs, or digitizing
business cards, this class serves as a versatile tool for text extraction.
 
VNRecognizedText: The primary functionality of this class is to
provide detailed information about the recognized text. It includes the
actual textual content that has been deciphered from the image.
Additionally, it furnishes information about the spatial location of the
recognized text within the image, offering precise coordinates that
denote its position. This also indicates the confidence level associated
with each recognized text segment. This confidence level represents
the system’s degree of certainty regarding the accuracy of the
recognition.
 
VNSequenceRequestHandler: The primary role of this request handler
lies in its essential contribution to real-time video analysis. By
efficiently managing a sequence of images, it becomes a foundational
component for applications that require dynamic insights from video
streams, such as augmented reality experiences. One of the key
strengths of VNSequenceRequestHandler is its ability to provide
dynamic insights across consecutive frames. Whether it’s monitoring
traffic patterns, or tracking user movements in a fitness app, this
handler serves as a versatile tool.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 431 ---
 
Creating a Sample Image Classification App
 
After exploring the theoretical dimensions of Core ML and the Vision
framework, let’s transition from theory to practice by developing a
real-time image recognition app. In this practical endeavor, we will
seamlessly integrate Core ML and the Vision framework to recognize
images sourced from the photo library. This hands-on experience will
illuminate how these powerful frameworks collaborate to identify
objects within an image.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 432 ---
 
Building UI
 
To initiate our journey in developing this app, let’s commence by crafting
the user interface (UI). We will begin by creating an iOS app using Xcode
and naming it ImageRecognition. After saving the project, let’s look into
constructing the user interface for the app. The UI design for this
application will be very simple, requiring only an imageView and a
UILabel. Navigate to the Main.storyboard file within your project
directory. From the object library, drag and drop an imageView and a
UILabel onto the canvas. If you need a refresher on the UI creation
process using the storyboard, you can refer to the earlier Chapter 2,
Getting Started with iOS App Next, choose the UIImageView on the
canvas and assign an image to it, as demonstrated in Figure You can opt
for a custom image or a system image; we will be using a system image in
this case. Additionally, let’s apply auto-layout constraints to ensure these
elements remain in their designated positions. Furthermore, we will
include the text “Select Image” in the label, as illustrated in Figure
 

--- Page 433 ---
 
Figure 8.2: User Interface
 
Next, we will need to create outlets for the UIImageView and UILabel.
Navigate to the top-right corner of Xcode and click the button that
indicates add editor on the right. This opens the Assistant which allows
you to view both the code and the storyboard simultaneously. We will now
open the ViewController.swift file on the right side. Next, perform a Ctrl +
Drag operation to select the UIImageView in the view controller. Assign
the outlet name “imageView” for the UIImageView. Similarly, repeat this
process for the UILabel, naming its outlet as “descriptionLabel”.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 434 ---
 
Initiating ImagePicker
 
Now that we have built the user interface, the next step involves
initializing the imagePicker to facilitate the selection of an image from
the photo library. This enables us to analyze the chosen image using
Core ML. Add the following code to
 
override func viewDidLoad() {
super.viewDidLoad()
1.         imageView.isUserInteractionEnabled = true
2.         let tap = UITapGestureRecognizer(
3.             target: self,
4.             action: #selector(didTapImage)
5.         )
6.         tap.numberOfTapsRequired = 1
7.         imageView.addGestureRecognizer(tap)
}
 
Line 1 enables user interaction for the allowing gestures to be
recognized on it. In line 2, we create a UITapGestureRecognizer
named tap. This gesture recognizer is configured to recognize a single
tap. We set the target to self and add an action method didTapImage,
which will be called when you click on the image. Line 6 sets the
number of taps required for the gesture to be recognized. In this case,

--- Page 435 ---
it’s set to 1, indicating a single tap gesture to be recognized. Finally, in
line 7, the tap gesture recognizer is added to the This means that when
the user taps on the imageView, the didTapImage method will be
called.
 
Let’s add didTapImage method as follows:
 
@objc func didTapImage() {
let picker = UIImagePickerController()
picker.sourceType = .photoLibrary
picker.delegate = self
present(picker, animated: true)
}
 
In this method, an instance of UIImagePickerController is created.
This controller allows the user to pick media from their photo library
or capture new media using the device’s camera. Here, we set the
source type for the image picker to .photoLibrary, indicating that it
should allow the user to choose an image from their photo library.
Next, we set the delegate for imagePicker to self. The delegate
methods will be called in response to the user’s interactions with the
Finally, we present the imagePicker on the screen. We will implement
certain delegate methods for the To achieve this, the first step involves
conforming to the UIImagePickerControllerDelegate and
UINavigationControllerDelegate protocols.
 

--- Page 436 ---
func imagePickerControllerDidCancel(_ picker:
UIImagePickerController) {
picker.dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
}
 
In the preceding function, when the user cancels the image-picking
process, this function ensures that the UIImagePickerController is
dismissed from the screen, providing a smooth transition and returning
control to the main view.
 
   func imagePickerController(_ picker: UIImagePickerController,
didFinishPickingMediaWithInfo info:
[UIImagePickerController.InfoKey : Any]) {
picker.dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
guard let image =
info[UIImagePickerController.InfoKey.originalImage] as? UIImage
else {
return
}
imageView.image = image
}
 
This function is automatically called when the user picks an image
within the UIImagePickerController. Similar to the previous function,
we will dismiss the image picker after an image has been successfully
selected. This guard statement here attempts to retrieve the original

--- Page 437 ---
image from the info dictionary, which contains information about the
picked media. The originalImage key is used to access the selected
image. If the retrieval is successful, the image is unwrapped and
assigned to the constant image. If not, the function exits. If the image
retrieval is successful, the image is set as the content of the This
updates the UI to display the selected image.
 
If you run the app and tap the it will present the Upon selecting an
image, it should seamlessly appear within the
 
Now that we are able to select an image using ImagePicker, let’s
explore how we can classify and recognize this chosen image.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 438 ---
 
Image Classification
 
As discussed in the previous section, where we covered the theoretical
aspects of Core ML and Vision frameworks, we will now proceed to
integrate them into our app. The initial step involves adding the model.
The Core ML model is typically created using various machine learning
tools and frameworks. Once the model is trained and fine-tuned for a
specific task, it undergoes a conversion process to be compatible with
Core ML. The conversion process involves converting the trained model
into the Core ML format, which is a specialized format optimized for
Apple’s devices. This format ensures efficient execution and integration
with the Core ML framework, allowing developers to seamlessly
incorporate machine learning capabilities into their applications. We will
be incorporating an existing model into our app, developed by Apple. You
can explore various Core ML models by referring to the following link.
We will be using MobileNetV2 from the list. You should download it by
selecting the first option, as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 439 ---
 
Figure 8.3: Core ML Model
 
Once you have downloaded the model, drag and drop it to your project
folder so that we can use it in our app. After doing this, your project

--- Page 440 ---
structure should look something like Figure
 
 
Figure 8.4: Project Structure
 

--- Page 441 ---
Let’s navigate to the ViewController.swift file and add some code. Firstly,
we will import Core ML and Vision framework in the Next, we will create
a function called classifyImage as func classifyImage(image: We will be
passing the selected image from the ImagePicker to this function to
classify. Next, we will add the following code to the function:
 
1. func classifyImage(image: UIImage) {
2.         guard let ciImage = CIImage(image: image) else { return }
3.         do {
4.             let config = MLModelConfiguration()
5.            let coreMLModel = try MobileNetV2 (configuration: config)
6.             let visionModel = try VNCoreMLModel(for:
coreMLModel.model)
7.             let request = VNCoreMLRequest(model: visionModel) {
(request, error) in
8.                 guard let results = request.results as?
[VNClassificationObservation], let _ = results.first else {
9.                     return
10.                 }
11.                 DispatchQueue.main.async {
12.                     let classifications = results.prefix(2)
13.                     let descriptions = classifications.map {         classification
in
14.                         return String(format: “  (%.2f) %@”,
classification.confidence, classification.identifier)
15.                     }
16.                     self.descriptionLabel.text = “Classification:\n” +
descriptions.joined(separator: “\n”)
17.                 }

--- Page 442 ---
18.             }
19.          let handler = VNImageRequestHandler(ciImage: ciImage)
20.             do {
21.                 try handler.perform([request])
22.             } catch {
23.                 print(“Error performing classification: \(error)”)
24.             }
25.         }
26.         catch {
27.             fatalError(“Failed to load model: \(error)”)
28.         }
29.    }
 
Let’s understand what we are doing in this code now. Firstly, in line 2, we
create a CIImage object from the provided If the conversion fails (for
example, if the image is nil), the function exits. In line 3, a configuration
object for the Core ML model is created. This allows for the
customization of model behavior. You can refer to
MLModelConfiguration explanation in the earlier section. Next, we create
an instance of the MobileNetV2 model, which we have added to the
project. We will be using this model to classify the image. If you plan to
use some other model, you can add its instance here. In line 6, a Vision
framework-compatible model is created using the Core ML model. In line
7, we create a request using VNCoreMLRequest with a completion
handler. This handler processes the classification results. Next, we will
handle the classification results on the main thread to update the UI. We
will get the top two classifications from the results. We will format the

--- Page 443 ---
result and update the confidence and identifier onto the In line 19, we set
up a Vision Image Request using VNImageRequestHandler with We will
perform the image classification and handle any errors during the process.
Now, let’s see this code in action. We will first need to call this function.
Let’s head back to imagePicker delegate method and call this function as
follows:
 
func imagePickerController(_ picker: UIImagePickerController,
didFinishPickingMediaWithInfo info: [UIImagePickerController.InfoKey
: Any]) {
picker.dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
guard let image = info[UIImagePickerController.InfoKey.originalImage]
as? UIImage else {
return
}
imageView.image = image
classifyImage(image: image)
}
 
Now, let’s run the app and see the magic of these frameworks in play.
When you select the image, you should see the classification result on the
screen, as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 445 ---
 
Figure 8.5: Image Classification
 
The descriptionLabel shows the confidence and identifier name provided
for the image by the model. As we are using two results from the
classification, you can see two different values of identifier and the
respective confidence level for them.
 
This classification is purely dependent on how well the model is trained
and the quality of the image you are processing. In some cases, you can
get not-so-accurate results. You can play around by using your own
models. You can also create and train the model using CreateML, which is
another tool introduced by Apple. You can read more about it in the
following document:
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/createmlcomponents/
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 446 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we looked into the fundamental concepts of machine
learning. We also looked into an insightful overview of the Core ML
framework and its diverse set of classes. Additionally, we introduced
the Vision framework, a powerful tool by Apple designed for image
classification tasks. Taking our understanding a step further, we
embarked on the practical side by developing a sample app dedicated
to image classification. Through this hands-on exploration, we gained
valuable insights into the process of classifying images selected from
the photo library. There are countless advanced possibilities waiting to
be explored using the robust capabilities of the Core ML and Vision
frameworks.
 
In the next chapter, we will explore the concepts regarding testing,
which will involve concepts regarding unit testing and UI testing. We
will also look into various ways to debug the app, and finally, we will
explore the process of deploying the app to the app store.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 447 ---
 
References
  
Core https://developer.apple.com/documentation/coreml
 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/vision/
 
Core ML https://developer.apple.com/machine-learning/models/
 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/createmlcomponents/
 
https://github.com/ava-orange-education/iOS-App-Development-
Projects-Handbook
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 448 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
In Core ML, what is the role of a
  
Manages user interface elements
 
Represents a compiled machine learning model
 
Handles network requests
 
Provides database connectivity
 
In Core ML, what is the purpose of
  
Manages user interface layout
 
Efficiently make predictions on batches of input data
 
Represents a value for a feature in a machine learning model
 
Manage batches of database transactions

--- Page 449 ---
 
Which class in Core ML allows configuration options for loading a
machine learning model?
  
MLModelConfiguration
 
MLFeatureValue
 
MLModelOptimizer
 
MLUpdateContext
 
What accessibility features does the Vision framework contribute to?
  
Audio processing
 
Image rendering
 
Database management
 
Image description and face recognition
 
What is the primary role of the VNImageRequestHandler class in the
Vision framework?

--- Page 450 ---
  
Handle network requests
 
Handle image rendering
 
Manage image analysis requests
 
Optimize image compression
 
In the Vision framework, which class represents the result of text
recognition?
  
VNTextRecognitionResult
 
VNRecognizedText
 
VNOpticalCharacterObservation
 
VNTextObservation
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 451 ---
 
Answers
  
b
 
c
 
a
 
d
 
c
 
b
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 452 ---
CHAPTER 9
 
Testing, Debugging, and Deployment
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 453 ---
 
Introduction
 
In previous chapters, our exploration has been focused on the
development of iOS applications. However, the journey does not
conclude with app development alone; achieving excellence demands
a commitment to delivering high-quality applications. Quality
assurance becomes an important aspect. As developers, we hold the
power to contribute to the quality of our applications, and one potent
tool at our disposal is unit testing. This chapter will take you through
different aspects of unit testing, its benefits and providing illustrative
examples. Additionally, we will explore essential topics such as
debugging in iOS, a crucial skill for identifying and resolving issues
during development. Moreover, our exploration extends beyond the
development phase to look into the process of deploying an application
to the App Store, emphasizing the crucial steps in ensuring a seamless
release.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 454 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Testing in iOS
 
Benefits of Unit Testing
 
Introduction to XCTest Framework
 
UI Testing in iOS
 
Debugging in iOS
 
Certificates and Profiles
 
AppStore Deployment
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 455 ---
 
Testing in iOS
 
The primary goal of testing is to identify any errors, bugs, or
deviations from the desired behavior in a software system. Testing is a
crucial aspect of iOS application development with the principal aim
of discovering and rectifying errors, bugs, or any disparities from the
expected behavior within the software system. This imperative process
ensures the robustness and reliability of an iOS application. In iOS
development, rigorous testing is extremely important to deliver
applications that not only meet functional specifications but also
provide a seamless and satisfactory user experience. iOS developers
employ various testing methodologies throughout the software
development lifecycle to identify and address potential issues early on.
The iOS testing landscape contains different types of testing, including
Unit Testing, UI Testing, and Integration Testing.
 
When you are building an iOS application you are putting together all
complex functionalities. Now, unit testing is like checking each tiny
part of the app to ensure it fits and functions properly. In this context, a
“unit” is simply the smallest testable part of your application, such as a
single function or a method. The whole point of unit testing is to make
sure that every piece of your application works as intended. By doing
these mini-checks, you can catch and fix any bugs early on in the

--- Page 456 ---
development process. So, in a nutshell, unit testing is an important
move to maintain the health and integrity of your application.
 
Key characteristics of unit testing include:
  
Unit tests are often automated, meaning that they are written as code
and executed automatically during the development process.
Automation allows for frequent and consistent testing, making it easier
to catch and address issues early. In iOS development, XCTest is a
popular testing framework. You can write automated unit tests using
XCTest to check whether a function, like a login validation, works
consistently. These tests can be integrated into your Xcode project and
automatically run whenever you build your app.
 
Unit tests are expected to execute quickly, facilitating their integration
into the development workflow. Fast-running tests encourage
developers to run them frequently, aiding in rapid feedback on code
changes. Suppose you have a unit test for a data validation method.
The test should run quickly, providing rapid feedback to developers.
This speed allows developers to run tests frequently, making it easier
to catch and fix issues early in the development process.
 
Unit tests should be repeatable, producing the same results each time
they are run. This reliability is essential for identifying changes in
behavior and ensuring consistency in the software’s functionality. A
unit test for an additional function should produce the same result

--- Page 457 ---
every time it’s executed. This repeatability ensures that if someone else
runs the test or you run it at a later time, you’ll consistently get the
expected outcome, helping to identify any unexpected changes in
behavior.
 
Unit tests are designed to isolate a specific part of the code and verify
its behavior independently of other components. This ensures that the
test results accurately reflect the functionality of the individual unit. If
you are testing a specific function in your iOS app that calculates user
statistics, isolate it from other parts of the app. Test its behavior
independently, ensuring it provides accurate results without relying on
external components.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 458 ---
 
Benefits of Unit Testing
 
Unit testing in iOS development offers several advantages,
contributing to the overall robustness and reliability of your
applications. Here are some key advantages:
  
Bug Detection: Unit testing serves as a crucial mechanism for bug
detection by enabling developers to identify and address issues at an
early stage of the software development process. By isolating and
testing individual units of code, such as functions or methods,
developers can evaluate the correctness of each component in isolation
from the broader system. This focused approach allows for the rapid
identification of bugs and defects within specific units, facilitating a
targeted and efficient debugging process. Early bug detection is
particularly advantageous as it helps prevent the propagation of errors
to other parts of the codebase, reducing the likelihood of complex and
interconnected issues. Consequently, developers can address bugs
swiftly, minimizing the overall impact on the software and ensuring a
more robust and reliable application.
 
Code Maintainability: Unit tests contribute significantly to the
maintainability of code by providing a safety net for developers when

--- Page 459 ---
modifying or extending the codebase. When changes are made,
running unit tests helps validate that the existing functionality of
individual units or components is preserved. This assurance is
particularly valuable in large and complex codebases, as developers
can confidently implement modifications without the fear of
introducing unintended side effects or breaking other parts of the
application. The comprehensive tests act as a form of documentation,
specifying the expected behavior of each unit and serving as a
reference for developers working on the code. This systematic
approach to testing ensures that any deviations from expected behavior
are quickly identified, making it easier for developers to catch and
rectify issues early in the development process. Ultimately, unit tests
enhance code maintainability by fostering continuous validation and
providing developers with the confidence to make changes and
improvements to the codebase.
 
Improved Unit tests play a crucial role in facilitating and improving
the process of refactoring by providing a safety net for developers.
Refactoring involves making structural changes to the code without
altering its external behavior. The presence of a comprehensive suite of
unit tests ensures that, after refactoring, the expected functionality and
behavior of individual units or components are preserved. The tests act
as a safeguard against unintended consequences, helping developers
identify and address issues that may arise during the refactoring
process. If any unit tests fail following a refactoring change,
developers are immediately alerted to potential problems, enabling
them to pinpoint the specific areas that require attention. This feedback

--- Page 460 ---
loop is invaluable in maintaining the integrity of the codebase during
structural improvements, as it allows developers to confidently carry
out refactoring activities, knowing that any deviations from expected
behavior will be promptly identified and rectified. In essence, unit tests
provide a reliable mechanism for validating the correctness of code
changes during the refactoring process, contributing to the overall
stability and maintainability of the software.
 
Automation and Continuous The automation of unit tests and their
integration into the development workflow offers significant
advantages in terms of efficiency and code quality. Automated testing
tools, such as XCTest in the context of iOS development, enable the
automatic execution of unit tests, providing developers with quick and
consistent feedback on the health of the codebase. This automation is
particularly valuable because it allows developers to run tests
frequently and consistently, catching issues early in the development
process. Integration of unit tests into a continuous integration (CI)
environment is especially crucial in scenarios where changes are
regularly integrated into the main codebase. In a CI setup, automated
tests are triggered automatically whenever code changes are
committed, ensuring that any potential regressions or new issues are
promptly identified. This not only accelerates the development cycle
but also helps maintain a stable and reliable codebase by preventing
the introduction of defects with each integration. Overall, automation
and continuous integration of unit tests contribute to a more robust and
efficient application development process.

--- Page 461 ---
 
Time and Cost Investing time in writing unit tests proves to be a cost-
effective strategy in the software development lifecycle. Though the
initial creation of tests requires an upfront investment, it results in
significant time and cost savings over the course of the project. By
identifying and addressing bugs at an early stage, unit tests mitigate
the need for extensive debugging and issue resolution later in the
development process. This early bug detection not only streamlines the
development cycle but also contributes to a more efficient use of
resources. As the project scales, the impact of time and cost savings
becomes more pronounced, particularly because the testing process
becomes increasingly crucial in larger, more complex codebases. Unit
tests create a proactive and preventative approach to software quality,
minimizing the resources spent on reactive bug fixing and ensuring a
more robust and reliable final product. In essence, the initial time
investment in unit testing yields substantial long-term benefits by
optimizing development efficiency and reducing overall project costs.
 
Unit tests play a significant role in fostering collaboration among
development teams by serving as a form of documentation. As a new
developer joins a project, the suite of unit tests provides a clear and
detailed reference point for understanding the intended functionality of
various components within the codebase. This documentation aspect
helps streamline the onboarding process, enabling developers to
understand the behavior of individual units and their expected
outcomes. By referring to unit tests, team members can gain insights

--- Page 462 ---
into the purpose and usage of different code segments, promoting a
shared understanding of the project’s architecture and logic. This
shared understanding, facilitated by unit tests, enhances collaboration
by reducing ambiguity and ensuring consistency in code interpretation
among team members. Ultimately, the documentation provided by unit
tests contributes to a more collaborative development environment,
where team members can work cohesively, build upon existing
knowledge, and maintain a consistent understanding of the codebase.
 
The practice of writing unit tests promotes the development of
modular and loosely coupled code, contributing to a more
maintainable and scalable codebase. Units in the context of unit testing
typically refer to small, independently testable components such as
functions or methods. To make these units testable in isolation,
developers are encouraged to break down their code into modular
components. This emphasis on modularity results in code that is more
segmented, with each module responsible for a specific functionality.
Loosely coupling these modules means that they can operate
independently, and changes in one module have minimal impact on
others. This modular and loosely coupled design not only makes
individual units easier to test but also enhances the overall
maintainability of the codebase. Developers can update or extend
specific modules without disrupting the entire system, facilitating
easier debugging, refactoring, and scalability. In essence, unit testing
promotes a modular approach to coding, leading to a more
maintainable and adaptable software architecture.

--- Page 463 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 464 ---
 
Introduction to XCTest framework
 
XCTest, as the official testing framework for Apple platforms, not only
integrates seamlessly into Xcode but also offers a range of features that
streamline the testing process for macOS and iOS applications.
Developers benefit from XCTest’s support for asynchronous testing,
allowing them to handle scenarios involving asynchronous operations
and ensuring thorough testing of code that involves callbacks, network
requests, or delays. The XCTest framework supports the concept of
performance testing, enabling developers to assess the performance
characteristics of their code and identify potential bottlenecks or areas
for optimization. This is particularly valuable for ensuring that
applications meet performance requirements and deliver a responsive
user experience. Moreover, XCTest supports the creation of test suites,
allowing developers to group related tests together. This organizational
structure enhances test management and facilitates the execution of
specific sets of tests, enhancing efficiency during development.
 
In addition to XCTest’s default assertion methods, developers can also
create custom assertions tailored to the specific requirements of their
applications. This flexibility allows for the extension of the testing
capabilities and ensures that developers can address diverse testing
scenarios effectively.

--- Page 465 ---
 
The framework provides a range of assertion methods, such as and
offering developers a means to validate conditions and compare values
during testing. These assertion methods play a pivotal role in ensuring
that the actual results align with the expected outcomes, contributing to
the robustness and quality of the development process on Apple
platforms.
 
Let’s look at some of the examples of XCTest framework usage.
 
The following example of the unit test is checking the addition
operation by calling a function add with arguments 2 and 2 and
asserting that the result is equal to 4. If the assertion holds true, the test
passes; otherwise, it fails, providing insight into any issues with the
addition function. This example demonstrates the fundamental
structure of a unit test using XCTest.
 
import XCTest
class MyTests: XCTestCase {
func testAddition() {
let result = add(2, 2)
XCTAssertEqual(result, 4, “Addition is correct”)
}
}
 

--- Page 466 ---
Performance Testing: XCTest supports performance testing, which is a
valuable aspect of ensuring that critical sections of code meet specified
performance criteria. XCTest supports performance testing to measure
the execution time of specific code paths. The measure function allows
developers to evaluate the performance of critical sections of code.
 
import XCTest
class PerformanceTests: XCTestCase {
func performanceExample() {
measure {
let result = calculateFactorial(of: 20)
XCTAssert(result > 0, “Valid factorial calculation”)
}
}
}
 
This performance test measures the execution time of the
calculateFactorial function for the input value of 20. The XCTAssert
statement is used to verify that the result is greater than 0, adding a
validation criterion to ensure not only performance but also correctness
in the calculated factorial. Running this test with XCTest will generate
performance metrics and validate the expected result.
 
Asynchronous Operation Testing: XCTest provides mechanisms for
handling asynchronous code. Testing asynchronous operations can be
challenging because the test may finish execution before the

--- Page 467 ---
asynchronous task completes. The XCTest framework provides a
solution to this problem with expectations, which allow the test to wait
for asynchronous tasks to finish before proceeding.
 
import XCTest
class MyAsyncTests: XCTestCase {
func testAsyncOperation() {
let expectation = XCTestExpectation(description: “Async operation
completed”)
performAsyncOperation {
expectation.fulfill()
}
wait(for: [expectation], timeout: 5.0)
}
}
 
This asynchronous test uses XCTestExpectation to ensure that the
asynchronous operation, represented by the closure passed to
performAsyncOperation, completes within a specified timeframe. The
test waits for the expectation to be fulfilled, and if it’s not fulfilled
within the specified timeout, the test will fail.
 
setUp and The setUp and tearDown methods in XCTest provide a
mechanism for developers to set up and clean up resources before and
after each test method, ensuring a consistent and controlled
environment for testing.

--- Page 468 ---
 
The setUp method is called automatically before each test method in
the test case class. It is primarily used for preparing the test
environment by setting up resources, initializing objects, or
configuring necessary settings. Examples of actions performed in
setUp might include creating instances of objects, opening files,
establishing connections, or configuring the state of the system to a
known state.
 
import XCTest
class MyTests: XCTestCase {
override func setUp() {
// Code to set up resources
}
 
The tearDown method is called automatically after each test method in
the test case class. It is intended for cleaning up resources, releasing
memory, or performing any necessary cleanup operations.
 
override func tearDown() {
// Code to clean up resources
}
 
In the XCTest framework, there are several key classes that you will
use to write and organize tests. Here are some important classes within
XCTest:

--- Page 469 ---
  
XCTestCase is the base class for test cases. XCTestCase is designed to
be subclassed by developers to create individual test cases. Each
subclass represents a logical grouping of related tests. Test methods
within these subclasses are designed to validate specific behaviors or
functionalities of the code being tested.
 
XCTestExpectation is a class provided by XCTest for handling
asynchronous code in testing scenarios. It allows developers to create
expectations that can be fulfilled when asynchronous tasks complete.
This is particularly useful when testing code that involves
asynchronous operations, such as callbacks, network requests, or other
background tasks. We saw the example regarding this in the preceding
section.
 
is a collection of test cases that can be run together. It can include
multiple test case classes or even other test suites. XCTest
automatically creates a default test suite for your test classes.
XCTestSuite is a versatile class that facilitates the organization and
execution of multiple test cases or test suites. Whether using default
test suites or creating custom ones, XCTestSuite provides a flexible
and scalable approach to managing and running tests in XCTest.
 

--- Page 470 ---
XCTAssertionResult is a structure in XCTest that encapsulates the
result of an assertion made during the execution of a test. When you
use assertion methods like or others in their test methods, XCTest
internally creates an XCTAssertionResult object to represent the
outcome of that specific assertion. This structure contains information
about whether the assertion passed or failed, along with additional
details to aid in diagnosing test failures. You typically do not need to
explicitly create XCTAssertionResult instances in the test code.
Instead, XCTest generates these results internally when assertions are
made. However, test frameworks or custom test utilities may interact
with XCTAssertionResult to inspect the results programmatically, as
we have already seen the way to access the result in the preceding
section.
 
let result = add(2, 2)
XCTAssertEqual(result, 4, “Addition is correct”)
 
The XCTAssert class provides a variety of assertion methods for
verifying conditions in tests. It includes methods such as and more. We
have seen the use of XCTAssertEqual in the preceding section.
 
All these classes are part of the XCTest framework but you will mainly
not use them all on a regular basis. The most important classes that
you will use more often include
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 471 ---
 
UI Testing
 
UI testing is an important aspect of iOS development. UI testing, short for
User Interface testing, involves the evaluation and validation of an
application’s user interface to ensure that it behaves as expected and meets
design specifications. This type of testing is automated and simulates user
interactions with the graphical user interface (GUI) of the application. In
the context of iOS development, Apple provides the XCTest framework,
which includes tools and classes for writing UI tests. XCTest UI tests
allow developers to interact with the app’s UI elements, such as buttons,
text fields, and tables, and to verify that the app responds appropriately to
user interactions.
 
Assume you have a product list screen with product cells containing
product names, prices, and an “Add to Cart” button.
 
#import
#import “YourProductListViewController.h”
 
@interface YourAppUITests : XCTestCase
@end
@implementation YourAppUITests
 
- (void)setUp {

--- Page 472 ---
[super setUp];
self.continueAfterFailure = NO;
[[[XCUIApplication alloc] init] launch];
}
 
- (void)tearDown {
[super tearDown];
}
 
- (void)testAddToCartFunctionality {
XCUIApplication *app = [[XCUIApplication alloc] init];
[app launch];
 
// Assuming you have accessibility identifiers set for your UI elements
XCUIElementQuery *productCells = app.collectionViews.cells;
 
// Assume there are at least two products displayed
XCUIElement *firstProductCell = [productCells
elementBoundByIndex:0];
XCUIElement *secondProductCell = [productCells
elementBoundByIndex:1];
 
// Tap the “Add to Cart” button for the first product
[[firstProductCell buttons][@”AddToCartButton”] tap];
 
// Verify that the cart count has increased to 1

--- Page 473 ---
XCTAssertEqualObjects(app.staticTexts[@”CartCountLabel”].label,
@”1”);
 
// Tap the “Add to Cart” button for the second product
[[secondProductCell buttons][@”AddToCartButton”] tap];
 
// Verify that the cart count has increased to 2
XCTAssertEqualObjects(app.staticTexts[@”CartCountLabel”].label,
@”2”);
}
@end
 
In this example, the testAddToCartFunctionality method simulates tapping
the “Add to Cart” button for two different products in the product list and
verifies that the cart count label updates correctly.
 
To enable Unit Tests in an Xcode project, follow these steps:
  
When initiating a new project in Xcode, make sure to check the
checkboxes for “Include Tests” during the project creation process, as
shown in Figure This will automatically set up the necessary testing
infrastructure. After creating the project, you will notice a folder named
“ProjectNameTests” within your project. Xcode will have already
generated a default test case class with a template, ready for testing. This
folder serves as the home for your unit and UI tests.
 

--- Page 474 ---
 
Figure 9.1: Include Tests
 
You can create additional test classes by opening a new file ( ⌘  + and
selecting either “Unit Test Case Class” or “UI Test Case This allows you
to extend your test suite beyond the default class generated by Xcode.
 
If the project was initially created without enabling Unit Tests, you can
add them later. To do so, press + N”, and choose “Unit Testing Bundle” or
“UI Testing This action will integrate the necessary testing components
into your existing project.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 475 ---
 
Debugging in iOS
 
Debugging involves the process of identifying, isolating, and fixing
issues, bugs, or unexpected behavior in your code. Xcode provides a
robust set of tools for debugging your iOS applications. Here is an
overview of the debugging process and some commonly used tools:
  
Setting Breakpoints: Placing breakpoints in your code allows you to pause
the execution at specific lines. This enables you to inspect the program’s
state and variables at that particular moment. To set a breakpoint, click on
the line number in Xcode’s editor, as shown in Figure When the app
reaches that line during execution, it will pause, allowing you to inspect
variables, evaluate expressions, and navigate through the code step by
step.
 

--- Page 476 ---
 
Figure 9.2: Setting Breakpoint
 
View Debugger: The View Debugger in Xcode allows you to inspect and
interact with the view hierarchy of your app while it’s running. This is
especially helpful for debugging UI-related issues. You can access the
View Debugger by clicking the “View UI Hierarchy” button, as shown in
Figure
 

--- Page 477 ---
 
Figure 9.3: View Debugger
 
LLDB (Low-Level Debugger): Xcode integrates with LLDB, a powerful
debugger. You can use LLDB commands in the console to inspect
variables, change variable values, and manipulate the program’s flow. The
most common LLDB command used in Xcode is po command. It is used
to print the value of an Objective-C or Swift object during a debugging
session, as shown in Figure It stands for “Print Object” and is commonly
used to inspect the contents of variables and objects.
 

--- Page 478 ---
 
Figure 9.4: LLDB Command
 
Conditional Breakpoints: You can set breakpoints with conditions, which
means they will only pause the execution when a specified condition is
met. This is useful for debugging specific scenarios. To add a conditional
breakpoint, you can add a condition under the “Breakpoint” tab, as shown
in Figure Enable the “Automatically continue after evaluating actions”
option if you want the program to continue running after the breakpoint is
hit, provided the condition is not met. Enter the condition in the text field.
For example, if you want the breakpoint to trigger only when a variable
counter is equal to 1, you can enter counter == 1 as the condition. You can
also add actions to be performed when the breakpoint is hit. This can
include logging messages, running custom LLDB commands, or
evaluating expressions.
 

--- Page 479 ---
 
Figure 9.5: Conditional Breakpoint
 
Exception These breakpoints pause the execution whenever an exception
is thrown. They are helpful for identifying and handling runtime errors. To
add an exception breakpoint, go to the left panel and open the Breakpoints
Click the “+” button at the bottom of the Breakpoints and select
“Exception as shown in Figure You can specify conditions based on the
type of exception you want to catch.
 

--- Page 481 ---
 
Figure 9.6: Exceptional Breakpoint
 
Xcode provides Instruments, a profiling and performance analysis tool. It
helps you identify memory leaks, CPU usage, and other performance
issues in your application.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 482 ---
 
Certificates and Profiles
 
Certificates and provisioning profiles are essential components in iOS
development, serving to authenticate and authorize your app to run on
Apple devices. These components are crucial for ensuring the security
and integrity of the app deployment process. Let’s look into each of
them:
  
Certificates:
 
Certificates are an integral part of iOS app development, ensuring that
only authorized individuals or entities can develop, distribute, and
interact with applications on Apple’s ecosystem. They contribute to the
overall security and trustworthiness of the iOS app environment. Let’s
look at the types of certificates that are provided by Apple:
  
Development Certificate: When developing an iOS app, you need a
development certificate. This certificate is tied to your Apple
Developer account. Without a development certificate, you cannot
install and run your app on physical iOS devices. The certificate
ensures that the app is signed in a way that allows it to be deployed to
specific devices for testing purposes.

--- Page 483 ---
 
Distribution Certificate: To distribute your app to users, whether
through the App Store or ad-hoc distribution, you need a distribution
certificate. This certificate is used to sign the app for distribution, and
it’s required for submitting apps to the App Store or distributing them
outside the App Store. Distribution certificates are crucial for ensuring
the security and authenticity of the app during the distribution process.
They play a key role in establishing trust between the app, the device,
and the end-users.
  
Creating a certificate involves several steps, including generating a
Certificate Signing Request (CSR), creating the certificate in the Apple
Developer portal, and downloading and installing the certificate in
Xcode.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 484 ---
 
Generate CSR
 
To generate CSR, follow these process:
  
Open Keychain Access on your Mac. In the top menu, go to Keychain
Access > Certificate Assistant > Request a Certificate From a
Certificate
 
Enter your email address and a name for the CSR.
 
Choose “Save to disk” and click “Continue”.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 485 ---
 
Create a Certificate in Apple Developer Portal
 
The next step involves creating the certificate on Apple’s Developer
portal. Follow these steps to create a certificate:
  
Go to the Apple Developer portal. Sign in with your Apple ID.
Navigate to Certificates, IDs and
 
Under the “Certificates” section, click the “+” button to create a new
certificate. Choose “iOS App Development” under the Development
section and click “Continue”.
 
Upload the CSR file you generated. Click “Continue” and follow the
on-screen instructions to complete the certificate creation process.
 
Download the generated certificate file. Double-click the downloaded
.cer file. This will open Keychain Access and install the certificate.
 
In Xcode, go to Xcode > Settings > Select your Apple ID on the left
and click the “Manage Certificates…” button. Ensure that the
certificate you just created is listed under “iOS Development.”
 

--- Page 486 ---
Following similar steps, you can generate a distribution certificate.
  
Provisioning Profiles:
 
Provisioning Profiles in iOS serve as essential configuration files,
encapsulating critical details on the installation and execution of an
app on iOS devices. These profiles play an important role in iOS
development, guaranteeing that the testing or distribution of a specific
app is restricted to authorized devices and users. Let’s explore different
types of provisioning profiles provided by Apple:
  
Development Provisioning Profile: This profile is used during the
development and testing phases. It includes the list of devices
(identified by their UDIDs) that are authorized to run the app during
development. It also specifies the app ID, the development certificate,
and the entitlements. The Development Provisioning Profile is crucial
when deploying the app on physical devices for testing. It ensures that
only authorized devices can install and run the app during
development, providing a controlled environment for testing on real
hardware.
 
App Store Provisioning Profile: The App Store Provisioning Profile is
a prerequisite for submitting the app to the App Store. This profile is
associated with the App ID and the distribution certificate, and it does
not contain specific device information. It is used to sign the app for
submission to the App Store. It ensures that the app is properly signed

--- Page 487 ---
and authenticated, meeting Apple’s requirements for submission and
distribution.
 
Ad Hoc Provisioning Profile: If you want to distribute your app to a
specific set of devices for testing purposes without using the App
Store, you can create an Ad Hoc provisioning profile. This profile
includes a list of specific device UDIDs that are authorized to run the
app. It provides a controlled way to share the app with a targeted group
of users without making it publicly available. Developers often use Ad
Hoc Provisioning Profiles to distribute pre-release versions of their
apps to a limited group of testers. This could include internal testing
teams, beta testers, or clients who need to evaluate the app before its
official release.
  
There are two more important terms that you need to know when it
comes to app development and distribution:
  
App IDs: An App ID uniquely identifies your app on Apple’s servers.
There are two types: explicit and wildcard. Explicit App IDs are
specific to a single app, while wildcard App IDs cover multiple apps
from the same development team with a shared bundle seed ID.
 
Bundle IDs: The Bundle Identifier is a unique identifier for your app.
It must match the App ID registered in your Apple Developer account.
The Bundle ID is specified in your Xcode project settings and is used
to link your app with the corresponding provisioning profile.

--- Page 488 ---
 
Xcode manages much of the complexity of certificates and
provisioning profiles for you. It can request and renew certificates,
create and manage provisioning profiles, and handle the signing
process during build and distribution. Understanding and managing
certificates and profiles is crucial for a successful iOS app
development workflow. These components authenticate your identity
as a developer, link your app to your Apple Developer account, and
ensure that your app can run on designated devices or be distributed
through the App Store.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 489 ---
 
AppStore Deployment
 
Deploying an app to the App Store involves several steps, including
preparation, submission, review, and distribution. Following is an
overview of the App Store deployment process for an iOS app:
  
App Preparation:
 
To initiate the deployment process, it is essential to ensure that specific
elements within the app are prepared accordingly. Let’s look into these
crucial aspects that need attention before moving forward with the
deployment.
  
Xcode Configuration: Ensure that your Xcode project settings are
correctly configured with the appropriate bundle identifier, version
number, and build number. The version number and build number are
crucial for managing different releases of your app. The version
number is user-facing and indicates significant updates, while the build
number is an incremental identifier for each build. Ensure that both are
appropriately configured in Xcode, and update them as needed for
each release. The bundle identifier uniquely identifies your app in the
Apple ecosystem. It should match the one you have registered in your
Apple Developer account. Confirm that the bundle identifier is

--- Page 490 ---
correctly specified in Xcode project settings to avoid issues with code
signing and App Store submission.
 
Code Signing: Set up the necessary certificates and provisioning
profiles for both development and distribution. Ensure that your app is
signed correctly with the distribution certificate before archiving.
Configure the Code Signing Identity in Xcode project settings. For
development builds, select the appropriate development certificate, and
for distribution builds, select the distribution certificate. This ensures
that your app is signed correctly during the build process.
 
App Store Connect:
  
Create App ID: Register your app in the Apple Developer Portal and
create an App ID that matches your app’s bundle identifier. In the
Certificates, Identifiers and Profiles section on the developer portal,
locate and click on the “Identifiers” category. Here, you can view and
manage existing App IDs or create a new one. Click on the “+” button
to create a new App ID. Provide a name for your App ID, typically
matching your app’s name or project. For the Bundle ID, enter the
unique identifier for your app, ensuring it matches the one configured
in your Xcode project settings. Configure any additional services your
app may use, such as Push Notifications. Enable the necessary services
based on your app’s requirements.
 

--- Page 491 ---
Create App in App Store Connect: Log in to App Store Connect In the
App Store Connect dashboard, go to the “My Apps” section. This is
where you manage and organize your apps for distribution on the App
Store. Click on the “+” button to add a new app. Fill in the required
details for your app, including the app’s name, primary language,
bundle ID (matching the one you registered in the Apple Developer
Portal), and SKU. Specify the app’s availability date.
 
Build and Archive:
  
Build your App: In Xcode, build your app for distribution, ensuring
that you are using the correct distribution configuration and signing
with the distribution certificate.
 
Archive: Under select the “Archive” option. This initiates the
archiving process, collecting the build, and preparing it for
distribution. Xcode will open the Organizer window, displaying the
archived builds of your app. Before submitting the archive, you have
the option to validate it. This step checks for common issues and
ensures that your app meets the necessary requirements for
submission. After validating the archive, you can choose to distribute
it.
 
App Store Connect Submission:
 

--- Page 492 ---
Once the archive is uploaded to App Store Connect, make sure to fill
in all necessary information on the App Store Connect portal,
including the app’s description, screenshots, keywords, and other
metadata. Set the pricing, availability, and any other relevant details
for your app. This is necessary before submitting the app for review.
 
App Review:
  
Waiting for Review: After submission, your app goes into a queue for
review by Apple’s App Review team. This process typically takes a
few days, but it can vary.
 
Review Status: Monitor the status of your app in App Store Connect.
The review team might request additional information or clarification
during this period. The status will indicate whether your app is still
“Waiting for Review” or if the review process is complete.
 
App Release: Once your app passes the review process, it is approved
for release. You have the option to release it immediately or schedule a
release date.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 493 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we explored the foundational principles of testing in
the iOS development ecosystem. We looked into the advantages
offered by unit testing, emphasizing its role in identifying bugs and
ensuring robust application performance. Additionally, we provided an
introductory overview of the XCTest framework, discussing its
benefits and the various classes integral to the testing process. We also
looked into the concept of UI testing in iOS, where we discussed
methodologies and processes for validating the functionality of an
application’s user interface. We also got an in-depth understanding of
debugging in iOS, offering insights into different techniques to debug
and refine code during development. Furthermore, we got an overview
of certificates and provisioning profiles, and their crucial roles in
securing permissions for various stages of app development and
deployment. We also examined the deployment process itself, focusing
on the specific steps required to release an application on the App
Store.
 
By comprehensively covering these aspects, the chapter aimed to give
you an overall understanding of the testing, debugging, and
deployment processes, fostering the creation of high-quality and
reliable applications.
 

--- Page 494 ---
In the next chapter, we will explore some more advanced concepts
related to SwiftUI and its integration.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 495 ---
 
References
  
XCTest https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xctest
 
Certificate and https://developer.apple.com/help/account/create-
certificates/certificates-overview
 
Apple Developers https://developer.apple.com/account
 
App Store https://appstoreconnect.apple.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 496 ---
 
Multiple Choice Questions
  
Which XCTest method is commonly used to validate that two values
are equal?
  
validateEquality()
 
XCTAssertEqual()
 
checkEquals()
 
confirmEquality()
 
Which debugging tool in Xcode is used for inspecting and
manipulating the value of variables during runtime?
  
Profiler
 
Console
 
LLDB (Low-Level Debugger)

--- Page 497 ---
 
Breakpoint Navigator
 
Which certificate is crucial for submitting an iOS app to the App
Store?
  
Distribution Certificate
 
Development Certificate
 
Ad Hoc Certificate
 
Enterprise Certificate
 
What is a common method for setting breakpoints in Xcode during
iOS debugging?
  
Right-click and select “Pause Execution”
 
Use the “print” statement in the code
 
Place a breakpoint by clicking on the line number in the code
 
Trigger a runtime error intentionally

--- Page 498 ---
 
During app submission, what role does the App Review process play?
  
Approving the app for immediate release
 
Identifying and resolving bugs in the app
 
Verifying compliance with App Store guidelines
 
Determining the app’s pricing tier on the App Store
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 499 ---
 
Answers
  
b
 
c
 
a
 
c
 
c
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 500 ---
CHAPTER 10
 
Advance Concepts
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 501 ---
 
Introduction
 
Throughout our learning journey, we have explored the fundamental
concepts of iOS development. However, there are still several key
areas that need our attention as aspiring iOS developers. In this
chapter, one of the primary focuses will be SwiftUI, a modern
framework introduced by Apple for building user interfaces across all
Apple platforms. We will explore its core principles and advantages.
From there, we will explore the practical aspect of implementing
SwiftUI layouts. Furthermore, we will explore the process of
integrating SwiftUI into existing iOS applications. This integration
will involve understanding how SwiftUI interacts with existing UIKit
components and adapting your codebase to accommodate SwiftUI.
 
In addition to SwiftUI, we will also explore the concept called
SwiftData, a framework introduced by Apple that enhances data
handling and management. So, let’s dive in and explore these concepts
in detail.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 502 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
  
Introduction to SwiftUI
 
Building Basic Layout Using SwiftUI
 
Using SwiftUI Along with UIKit
 
Introduction to SwiftData
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 503 ---
 
Introduction to SwiftUI
 
SwiftUI is a framework introduced by Apple in 2019 to build user
interface elements. It allows developers to build user interfaces across
all Apple platforms, including iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS, using
a declarative syntax. SwiftUI represents a paradigm shift in UI
development, departing from the imperative approach of UIKit to
embrace a more declarative style. With SwiftUI, developers can define
the structure and appearance of their user interfaces in a highly
readable and maintainable manner. This declarative syntax not only
makes UI code easier to understand but also facilitates rapid iteration
and experimentation during the design phase.
 
Key features of SwiftUI:
 
Some of the important features of SwiftUI include:
  
Declarative SwiftUI uses declarative syntax, enabling developers to
define the UI’s structure and behavior using simple and intuitive code.
This approach allows developers to focus on describing what the UI
should look like, rather than worrying about how to achieve it.
 

--- Page 504 ---
Live SwiftUI offers a live preview feature that allows developers to
see the real-time changes they make to their UI code reflected instantly
in a preview window. This feature greatly accelerates the development
process by providing immediate feedback and facilitating rapid
iteration.
 
Automatic Layout SwiftUI automatically adapts the layout of UI
elements to fit different screen sizes, orientations, and device types.
This built-in responsiveness ensures that apps look great and remain
functional across a wide range of devices, from iPhones to iPads to
Macs.
 
Since both UIKit and SwiftUI are frameworks used for designing user
interfaces in iOS, there are some advantages and disadvantages that
both framework comes with.
 
Comparison with UIKit
 
Let’s look at some advantages of SwiftUI over UIKit:
  
Live Live Preview is a standout feature of SwiftUI, offering
developers the ability to receive real-time feedback as they make
adjustments to their UI code. This functionality drastically expedites
the development process by enabling developers to witness the
immediate effects of their changes without the need for manual

--- Page 505 ---
rebuilding or reloading. Such a feature has been notably absent in
UIKit, thus presenting a significant advantage when utilizing SwiftUI.
 
Declarative SwiftUI employs a declarative syntax, allowing developers
to describe the UI’s structure and behavior concisely and intuitively.
This approach simplifies UI development and makes code more
readable and maintainable compared to the UIKit.
 
Automatic Automatic Layout is another key strength of SwiftUI, as it
autonomously adjusts the layout of UI elements to suit various screen
sizes, orientations, and device types. This inherent responsiveness
minimizes the necessity for manual layout modifications, ensuring
consistent UI experiences across different devices. However, UIKit
doesn’t fully support it, it frequently demands various layout
adjustments when working with UIKit.
 
Inbuilt Animation and SwiftUI provides built-in support for creating
interactive and animated user interfaces, including gestures,
animations, transitions, and other dynamic elements. This makes it
easier for developers to create engaging and visually appealing UIs
without relying on third-party libraries or complex custom code.
 
Now that we know about the various amazing advantages of using
SwiftUI, let’s also look at some of the challenges that you could face
when using SwiftUI.

--- Page 506 ---
 
Disadvantages of SwiftUI:
  
Limited While SwiftUI offers numerous features and capabilities for
creating modern user interfaces, it may still lack certain advanced
functionalities or components that are readily available in UIKit. This
can lead developers to situations where they must either incorporate
UIKit alongside SwiftUI or create custom solutions to fulfill specific
UI requirements.
 
Compatibility with Older iOS A notable constraint of SwiftUI is its
compatibility, as it is exclusively available on iOS 13 and later
versions. Consequently, applications developed using SwiftUI may not
be compatible with older iOS iterations. This limitation poses potential
challenges regarding the accessibility and reach of such apps for users
who are unable to upgrade to the latest iOS versions.
 
Lack of Stability: SwiftUI is a relatively new framework compared to
UIKit, and as such, it may lack some stability compared to UIKit.
Developers may encounter bugs, limitations, or undocumented
behaviors when working with SwiftUI.
 
Ecosystem SwiftUI’s tooling and ecosystem are still evolving, which
means developers may encounter limitations or inconsistencies when
using third-party tools, libraries, or frameworks with SwiftUI.

--- Page 507 ---
Additionally, the availability of resources, tutorials, and community
support for SwiftUI may be more limited compared to the extensive
ecosystem supporting UIKit.
 
Now that we know about the advantages and challenges that could
come with using SwiftUI, let’s look at how the implementation
actually looks when using SwiftUI.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 508 ---
 
Building Basic Layout Using SwiftUI
 
In SwiftUI, everything is a view, from simple elements like text and
images to complex layouts and entire screens. Views define the structure
and appearance of the user interface. SwiftUI provides a wide range of
built-in views that you can use to create UI elements, and you can also
create custom views to encapsulate reusable UI components or complex
layouts. Before designing the app, let’s look at some of the key
components of SwiftUI.
 
Besides the View, there are several other key components and concepts to
consider:
  
Layout: SwiftUI provides several layout containers, such as VStack,
HStack, ZStack, and List, for arranging views in a vertical, horizontal, or
overlapping layout. These layout containers automatically handle the
positioning and sizing of their child views based on their content and any
specified layout constraints.
 
Modifiers: Modifiers are methods that you can call on a view to change its
appearance or behavior. SwiftUI uses a fluent interface to apply modifiers,
allowing you to chain multiple modifiers together to create complex
effects. Modifiers can be used to adjust properties such as color, font,
padding, alignment, and more.

--- Page 509 ---
 
State: State allows views to manage their internal data and respond to
changes over time. When the value of a state variable changes, SwiftUI
automatically updates the affected views to reflect the new state. State is a
fundamental concept in SwiftUI for building dynamic and interactive user
interfaces.
 
Data Binding: Data binding allows views to stay in sync with their
underlying data models. When the data changes, SwiftUI automatically
updates the affected views to reflect the new data. Data binding is
essential for building reactive and responsive user interfaces in SwiftUI.
 
Preview: SwiftUI includes a live preview feature that allows you to see
how your user interface will look and behave in real time as you write and
modify your code. Previews are especially useful for rapid iteration and
experimentation during the design process.
 
We will look into all these concepts practically when we create a demo
using SwiftUI. Let’s start by creating the application using Xcode.
Remember to select the interface as SwiftUI, as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 510 ---
 
Figure 10.1: Project Creation
 
Once you have created your project, you will see a ContentView interface
created in SwiftUI. It will also show you the preview for the UI elements.
For the demo purpose, we will be creating a user account creation flow.
Firstly, we will create a new Swift file called UserModel, which will act
as viewmodel for the user details. Create a new file “File” in the toolbar -
> New -> File and select a Swift file and name it as UserModel. Add the
following code to the UserModel file:
 
import SwiftUI

--- Page 511 ---
 
class UserModel: ObservableObject {
@Published var name: String = “”
@Published var email: String = ““
@Published var password: String = “”
}
 
This class includes properties for storing the user’s name, email, and
password, each of which triggers notifications to SwiftUI views when
their values change. This enables SwiftUI views to automatically update
and reflect the latest user data.
 
In the preceding code, a class named UserModel conforms to the
ObservableObject protocol. The protocol is part of SwiftUI’s Combine
framework. We are using it in this class so that it can store and publish
values for the user. We will be accessing these values later in the View
that we will create using SwiftUI. Next, we declare properties named
name, email, and password of type String within the UserModel class. The
@Published property wrapper indicates that changes to this property
should trigger notifications to any SwiftUI views that are observing the
UserModel.
 
Now, let’s head to the ContentView file and add some UI for creating the
user account. Firstly, we will add some properties as follows:
 
struct ContentView: View {
@StateObject private var viewModel = UserModel()

--- Page 512 ---
@State private var showAlert = false
@State private var registerStatus = false
 
The @StateObject property wrapper is used to retain a reference to an
instance of a class that conforms to the ObservableObject protocol.
viewModel is initialized with an instance of the UserModel class, which
we created previously. The @State property wrapper is used to declare
properties whose values are stored and managed by a view. showAlert is a
boolean variable initialized with a value of false, indicating that the alert
should not be shown initially. Similarly, we have the registerStatus for the
user, which we initially set to false. Next, let’s create some basic UI. We
will create a simple screen with a Title, three textfields, which will take
user input and add a button to create an account.
 
Remove the initial code from the body in ContentView and add the
following code:
 
1. var body: some View {
2.         VStack {
3.             Text(“Create Account”)
4.                 .font(.title)
5.             TextField(“Name”, text: $viewModel.name)
6.                 .textFieldStyle(.roundedBorder)
7.                 .padding()
8.             TextField(“Email”, text: $viewModel.email)
9.                 .textFieldStyle(.roundedBorder)
10.                 .padding()

--- Page 513 ---
11.             SecureField(“Password”, text: $viewModel.password)
12.                 .textFieldStyle(.roundedBorder)
13.                 .padding()
14.         }
15.     }
16.
 
In the preceding code, we use a VStack, which is a vertical stack that
arranges all its child views vertically. Firstly, we create a title for the
screen. You can customize it with font, color, and more. In line 5, we
create a TextField where the user will input the name. The text parameter
is bound to the name property of the viewModel object using the $ prefix,
enabling two-way data binding between the textfield and the name
property. We also define the style of the textfield as roundedBorder and
add padding. We repeat the same process to create email and password
textField, creating a SecureField for the password. All three textField
supports two-way data binding. You should see the preview of the UI on
the right-hand side as you make any new changes. Now, let’s add a Button
to register the user input. Add the button code after line 13 above:
 
1. Button {
2.                 registerStatus = false
3.                 showAlert.toggle()
4.                 if(!viewModel.name.isEmpty && !viewModel.email.isEmpty
&& !viewModel.password.isEmpty){
5.                     registerStatus.toggle()
6.                 }
7.             }

--- Page 514 ---
8.         label: {
9.             Text(“Create Account”)
10.                 .font(.system(size: 18, weight: .bold, design: .default))
11.                 .frame(maxWidth: .infinity, maxHeight: 60)
12.                 .foregroundColor(Color.white)
13.                 .background(Color.blue)
14.                 .cornerRadius(10)
15.         }.alert(isPresented: $showAlert) {
16.             if !registerStatus {
17.                 return Alert(title: Text(“Welcome \(viewModel.name)”),
message:            Text(“You have successfully registered”), dismissButton:
.default(Text(“OK”)))
18.             } else {
19.                 return  Alert(title: Text(“Failed to register”), message:
Text(“Please enter all the details”), dismissButton: .default(Text(“OK”)))
20.             }
21.         }
22.         .padding()
 
Line 1 defines a button and specifies the action to perform when the
button is tapped. Inside the closure, we set registerStatus to false and
toggle the showAlert boolean variable, which controls whether the alert is
presented. Next, in line 4, we check if name, email, and password are not
empty, and we change the registerStatus.toggle() that was set to true. Line
8 specifies the content displayed on the button. Inside the label closure,
we set the and Next, we want to show an alert to the user on successful
registration and failure. Hence, in line 15, we attach an alert to the button

--- Page 515 ---
and define its content. The alert is presented when the showAlert boolean
variable is true. If the registerStatus is true, we return the alert with “You
have successfully registered” and also display the user name on the alert
that was accessed using viewModel.name in line 17. The alert contains the
default “OK” button to dismiss. And, in the other part, we display the alert
with “Failed to register”. The final code in VStack should look as follows:
 
VStack {
Text(“Create Account”)
.font(.title)
TextField(“Name”, text: $viewModel.name)
.textFieldStyle(.roundedBorder)
.padding()
TextField(“Email”, text: $viewModel.email)
.textFieldStyle(.roundedBorder)
.padding()
SecureField(“Password”, text: $viewModel.password)
.textFieldStyle(.roundedBorder)
.padding()
Button {
registerStatus = false
showAlert.toggle()
if(!viewModel.name.isEmpty && !viewModel.email.isEmpty &&
!viewModel.password.isEmpty){
registerStatus.toggle()
}
}
label: {

--- Page 516 ---
Text(“Create Account”)
.font(.system(size: 18, weight: .bold, design: .default))
.frame(maxWidth: .infinity, maxHeight: 60)
.foregroundColor(Color.white)
.background(Color.blue)
.cornerRadius(10)
}.alert(isPresented: $showAlert) {
if registerStatus {
return Alert(title: Text(“Welcome \(viewModel.name)”), message:
Text(“You have successfully registered”), dismissButton:
.default(Text(“OK”)))
} else {
return Alert(title: Text(“Failed to register”), message: Text(“Please enter
all the details”), dismissButton: .default(Text(“OK”)))
}
}
.padding()
}
 
Now, let’s run the app and check if everything works as expected. Firstly,
you should see a screen with empty textField, as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 518 ---
 
Figure 10.2: User Creation
 
When you enter details in all three textField and click Create Account
button, you should see an alert with successful registration, as shown in
Figure
 

--- Page 520 ---
 
Figure 10.3: Successful registration
 
Congratulations!! You have successfully created your first screen using
SwiftUI. In the next section, we will look into how we can use SwiftUI in
our existing UIKit application.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 521 ---
 
Using SwiftUI Along with UIKit
 
Most of the old apps still persist to be dominated by UIKit and
transforming the entire codebase to use SwiftUI is not a feasible task.
Apple has introduced a way in which you can use SwiftUI in your
existing UIKit app. The process to do that is quite simple and
straightforward. Integrating SwiftUI into a UIKit project allows you to
leverage SwiftUI’s modern UI development capabilities while still
utilizing existing UIKit components and functionality.
 
UIHostingController is a UIKit class introduced as part of the SwiftUI
framework. It serves as a bridge between SwiftUI views and UIKit-
based viewcontrollers, allowing SwiftUI views to be integrated
seamlessly into UIKit projects. UIHostingController acts as a container
that wraps a SwiftUI view, allowing it to be presented within a UIKit
app. It provides the necessary infrastructure to render and manage
SwiftUI views within a UIKit environment. It manages the lifecycle of
the hosted SwiftUI view, ensuring that it is properly initialized,
displayed, updated, and deallocated as needed. It handles tasks such as
layout, rendering, and responding to user interactions. Let’s look into a
practical example of using the UIHostingController in any of the UIKit
ViewController.
 

--- Page 522 ---
Open any of your existing UIKit projects or you can create a new
UIKit project. For example, we will be using the SwiftUI View that we
created earlier and try to present it in a UIKit application. Firstly, head
to your ViewController File and import SwiftUI. Next, in the
ViewDidLoad method, add the following code:
 
1. override func viewDidLoad() {
2.         super.viewDidLoad()
3.         let swiftUIView = ContentView()
4.         let hostingController = UIHostingController(rootView:
swiftUIView)
5.         addChild(hostingController)
6.         view.addSubview(hostingController.view)
7.         hostingController.didMove(toParent: self)
8.        
hostingController.view.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints =
false
9.         NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
10.             hostingController.view.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.topAnchor),
11.             hostingController.view.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.leadingAnchor),
12.             hostingController.view.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.trailingAnchor),
13.             hostingController.view.bottomAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.bottomAnchor)
14.         ])

--- Page 523 ---
15.     }
 
Line 3 represents the SwiftUIView object that you want to integrate. In
Line 4, we create an instance of UIHostingController and make
swiftUIView as its Line 5 adds the hosting controller as a child
viewController of the current Then, the hosting controller’s view is
added as a subview of the current viewcontroller’s view using
addSubview(_:). Finally, didMove(toParent:) is called in line 7 to
notify the system that the child viewController has been added. Next,
we set up the necessary constraints to align the view. That’s it! We
have successfully added the swiftUI View to the UIKit viewController
class.
 
Now, if you run the app, you should see a fully working SwiftUI view
added to the screen. In the next section, we will look into other
advanced concepts introduced by Apple called SwiftData.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 524 ---
 
Introduction to SwiftData
 
In 2023, Apple introduced SwiftData, a data persistence framework
compatible with iOS 17 and later versions. SwiftData seamlessly
integrates with Core Data, enabling developers to combine the power of
Core Data’s capabilities alongside the additional functionalities offered by
SwiftData. SwiftData provides a simplified approach to perform CRUD
(Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations reducing boilerplate code.
Behind the scenes, SwiftData is powered by Core Data, which has been
used for years to perform complex data storage operations. Using
SwiftData eliminates concerns about database connectivity and SQL for
data retrieval tasks. Instead, you can concentrate on utilizing APIs and
Swift Macros like @Query and @Model to efficiently handle data
operations within your application. To observe the structure of SwiftData
code, let’s create a new project and add SwiftData as storage, as shown in
Figure
 

--- Page 525 ---
 
Figure 10.4: SwiftData Project
 
In the demo project, you should see a predefined sample of SwiftData
created. Let’s try and understand how this works. In the project structure,
find the file named Item. You should see the following code in that file:
 
import Foundation
import SwiftData
@Model
final class Item {
var timestamp: Date

--- Page 526 ---
init(timestamp: Date) {
self.timestamp = timestamp
}
}
 
This file creates the data model for you which you will need to store the
data. Here, we store the timeStamp value. When you create your own
model file, you can add different properties that suits your requirements.
This is how you define the schema of the data model in code. Using
@Model as a keyword, SwiftData automatically enables persistence for
the data class and offers other data management functionalities. Let’s head
to the ContentView file to see how the demo app accesses the SwiftData
context. In SwiftData, modelContext is simply accessed using
@Environment macro. A modelContext is responsible for managing the
lifecycle of your persistent models. All the operations such as inserting,
deleting, and updating the model are performed using modelContext.
 
If you look below the @Environment macro, you will find another macro
used called @Query. This is simply used to get access to the stored data. It
is extremely simple to add a new item using SwiftData.
 
private func addItem() {
withAnimation {
let newItem = Item(timestamp: Date())
modelContext.insert(newItem)
}
}

--- Page 527 ---
 
If you check the method called addItem() in ContentView, you will find a
line of code: This is used to insert a new item, where newItem is the
object of type Item. It just requires one line of code to perform data
insertion using SwiftData. Similarly, deleting the object is quite simple. In
the following method:
 
private func deleteItems(offsets: IndexSet) {
withAnimation {
for index in offsets {
modelContext.delete(items[index])
}
}
}
 
modelContext.delete(items[index]) is the single line of code needed to
delete a specific item. You just need to pass the item to the delete function.
Similarly, updating the item is also easy. You can get access to the item
that you want to modify and simply change the value of it, for example,
item.timestamp = and call This will update the item for you. These are the
basic things that you can do with SwiftData. However, there are various
other complex operations you can perform such as sorting, filtering with
predicates, handling relationships between models, and migration. For
more details, you can refer to
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 528 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we introduced SwiftUI and its key components. We
begin by introducing SwiftUI and its core components, aiming to
familiarize ourselves with its structure and purpose. We looked into
some fundamental differences between using SwiftUI and UIKit. We
explored the advantages of using SwiftUI and examined some
challenges that you might encounter when using SwiftUI. Later, we
explored the practical implementation by creating a basic layout for
user registration using SwiftUI and also looked into data binding with
the model. Through this hands-on exercise, you got insight into
SwiftUI’s declarative syntax and its ability to connect with data
models for dynamic user experiences. Moreover, we explored the
compatibility of SwiftUI with existing UIKit applications. We looked
into the concept of UIHostingController and how it makes it easier for
seamless integration between SwiftUI and UIKit.
 
Lastly, we introduced SwiftData, a new framework introduced by
Apple for data persistence. We looked into some basic setup that
comes with a sample app. You can try out different things using your
imagination and explore these concepts in more advance. We hope this
will encourage you to experiment with SwiftData, explore its

--- Page 529 ---
capabilities further, and leverage the full potential of SwiftUI and
Swift’s development ecosystem.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 530 ---
 
References
  
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/
 
SwiftUI with
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/uihostingcontroller
 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftdata
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 531 ---
 
Multiple Choice Question
  
Which framework provides a live preview feature that allows
developers to see real-time updates to their UI as they write code?
  
SwiftUI
 
UIKit
 
SpriteKit
 
Core Graphics
 
In SwiftUI, what is used to describe the layout and behavior of user
interfaces?
  
Imperative syntax
 
Declarative syntax
 
Protocol-oriented programming

--- Page 532 ---
 
Object-oriented programming
 
What is the minimum iOS version required for using SwiftData?
  
iOS 13
 
iOS 15
 
iOS 16
 
iOS 17
 
Which of the following platforms does SwiftUI support?
  
iOS only
 
macOS only
 
iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS
 
Android
 
What is the purpose of the @State property wrapper in SwiftUI?

--- Page 533 ---
  
To manage a user interface state that is local to a view
 
To define the structure of a data model
 
To handle asynchronous operations
 
To encapsulate business logic
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 534 ---
 
Answers
  
a
 
b
 
d
 
c
 
a
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 535 ---
Index
 
A
 
AppDelegate, functions
core data, handling 20
lifecycle events, handling 19
remote notification, managing 20
universal links, handling 20
ApplicationDelegate 123
application user interface, creating
AppStore Deployment, steps
App Preparation 198
app, reviewing 200
App Store, connecting 199
archive build, ensuring 199
releasing 200
store connect, submission 200
Architecture Patterns 13
Architecture Patterns, types
Model-View-Controller (MVC) 15
Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) 16
auto layout constraints, types
alignment 31
baseline 31

--- Page 536 ---
equal width/height 31
greater than/less than 31
position 30
size 30
spacing 31
 
C
 
Certificates 196
Certificates, terms
App IDs 198
Bundle IDs 198
Certificates, types
development 196
distribution 196
CLLocation 90
CLLocationManager 90
CLLocationManager, case
.autherizedWhenInUse 94
default 94
.denied 94
.notDetermined 94
.restricted 94
CLLocationManagerDelegate 94
Core Location 90
Core Location, functions

--- Page 537 ---
data, retrieving 90
geofencing 90
location, monitoring 90
privacy, controlling 90
region, monitoring 90
Core ML 164
Core ML, key classes
MLBatchProvider 167
MLDictionaryFeatureProvider 167
MLFeatureValue 166
MLImageContraint 167
MLModel 166
MLModelConfiguration 166
MLModelDescription 166
MLPredictionOptions 167
MLUpdateContext 168
Core ML, key features
continual, improving 165
multiple tasks, supporting 165
performance, optimizing 165
seamless, integrating 164
security 165
versatility 164
 
D
 

--- Page 538 ---
Debugging 192
Debugging, tools
breakpoints, setting 192
conditional, breakpoints 194
exception, breakpoints 195
instruments 195
LLDB (Low-Level Debugger) 193
View Debugger 193
Development, process
distribution, deploying 5
environment, configuring 4
maintenance, releasing 5
planning 4
quality, assurance 5
requirement, gathering 4
UI/UX, designing 4
didTapFetchWeather() 101
 
E
 
Extensions 62
Extensions, concepts
code, organizing 63
initializer 62
limitations 63
properties, adding 62

--- Page 539 ---
protocol, conformance 63
syntax, optimizing 62
 
F
 
Facebook SDK, setup
FBSDKLoginKit 126
 
G
 
getWeather 108
GraphRequest 129
 
H
 
HealthKit 142
HealthKit, applications
health, information 144
health/wellness, monitoring 143
medical research, studies 144
remote patient, monitoring 144
seamless, integrating 144
HealthKit Data, retrieving
HealthKit Framework, navigating
HealthKit, key features

--- Page 540 ---
activity, tracking 142
data collection, retrieving 142
interoperability 142
privacy 142
ResearchKit, integrating 143
HealthKit, key parameters
HKCategoryType 143
HKCharacteristicType 143
HKQuantityType/HKQuantity 143
HKStatisticsQuery 143
HKWorkoutType 143
HealthKit Permission, accessing
HealthKit, setup 145
 
I
 
Image Classification
ImagePicker, initiating
init() 93
iOS 2
iOS, functionalities
app launch 2
app, lifecycle 3
app, logic 2
app store, distributing 4
background, execution 3
data, networking 2
device features, interacting 2

--- Page 541 ---
persistence 3
User Interface (UI) 2
iOS Navigation 36
iOS Navigation, methods
presentation 38
segue 38
UINavigationController 37
UITabBarController 37
iOS, structure
AppDelegate 19
Assets 22
Info.plist 22
LaunchScreen 22
Main 22
SceneDelegate 21
ViewController 21
 
L
 
LaunchScreen 22
Layouts 30
Layouts, methods
auto layout 30
frames, autoresizing 32
programmatic layout 32
stack views 31

--- Page 542 ---
listArray 77
LocationManager
 
M
 
Machine Learning 162
Machine Learning, components
evaluation 163
optimizing 163
representation 162
training data 162
 
N
 
Navigation Controller
 
O
 
ObservableObject 207
 
P
 
programmatic user interface
Protocols 60

--- Page 543 ---
Protocols, concepts
adopting 60
conformance, checking 61
extension, implementing 61
keyword, defining 60
multiple protocols, conforming 60
protocol, inheritance 61
 
R
 
readHealthkitData 154
requestAuthorization 150
requestLocation 93
requestWhenInUseAuthorization() 93
 
S
 
SceneDelegate 21
sd_setImage 132
SDWebImage 121
self.tableView.reloadData() 81
setupData() 131
setUp method 188
shareDialog 135
SharingDelegate 135
Storyboard 25

--- Page 544 ---
Storyboard, key features 25
Storyboard Layout, steps 36
Storyboard Structure, utilizing
super.init() 93
Swift 43
Swift, advantages
apple ecosystem, supporting 46
design, safety 44
dynamic, library 45
fast, efficient 44
function program, paradigm 46
memory, managing 46
objective-c, interoperability 45
open-source, community 46
playground, interactive 45
syntax, readability 44
Swift Arrays, methods
append(_:) 52
contains(_:) 52
count 52
insert(_:at:) 52
isEmpty 52
remove(at:) 52
removeLast(): 52
Swift Closures, types
closure parameters 58
closures, escaping 59

--- Page 545 ---
shorthand, argument 59
trail closures 59
values, capturing 59
Swift Collection, types
Arrays 52
dictionaries 53
sets 52
Swift Control Flow, statements
Conditional 55
control transfer 56
for-in loops 56
repeat-while loops 56
swift 55
while loops 56
SwiftData 214
Swift, features
curve, learning 47
interoperability 47
memory safety, managing 47
performance 47
resources, community 47
syntax, readability 47
Swift Functions, types
function, calling 57
function declaration 57
function, overloading 57
function parameters 57

--- Page 546 ---
function parameters, modifying 57
return values 57
Swift, fundamental concepts
annotation, inference 49
contants 49
mutability 49
variables 49
Swift, key differences 48
Swift Operators, types
Arithmetic 50
comparison 50
compound assignment 50
logical 51
range 51
unary 51
Swift Optionals, optimizing 55
Swift Package 118
Swift Package, key points 119
Swift Package, process utilizing
SwiftUI 203
SwiftUI, advantages
animation, interaction 204
automatic, layout 204
declarative, syntax 204
live, preview 204
SwiftUI, concepts
SwiftUI, disadvantages

--- Page 547 ---
ecosystem, supporting 205
iOS Version, compatibility 205
lack, stability 205
limited feature 205
SwiftUI, key components
data, binding 206
layout 205
modifiers 206
preview 206
state 206
SwiftUI, key features
declarative syntax 204
layout, adaptation 204
live preview 204
SwiftUI With UIKit, utilizing 212
 
T
 
TableView, setup 75
tearDown method 189
Testing 183
third-party dependencies, methods
Carthage 118
CocoaPods 118
Swift Package Manager (SPM) 118
 
U

--- Page 548 ---
 
UIBarButtonItem 73
UIBarButtonItem, parameters
action 73
barButtonSystemItems 73
target 73
UIHostingController 212
UIImagePickerController 133
UIImageView 173
UINavigationBarAppearance 73
UITableView 69
UITableViewDelegate 84
UI Testing 191
UI Testing, steps 191
unit testing, key advantages
Bug, detecting 184
code, maintainability 184
collaborating 186
continuous integration, automation 185
modularity 186
refactore, improving 185
time/cost, saving 185
unit testing, key characteristics
automation 183
execution 183
isolation 184
repeatable 183

--- Page 549 ---
URLReques 105
URLRequest, key elements
HTTP Body 106
HTTP Headers 106
HTTP Method 106
URL 106
URLSession 105
URLSession, tasks
background task 105
data task 105
download task 105
upload task 105
websocker task 105
UserDefaults
UserDefaults, parameters
editingStyle 81
indexPath 81
tableView 81
User Interface, creating
User-Interface Design
user profile, viewing
 
V
 
ViewController, concepts
data, presenting 21

--- Page 550 ---
lifecycle events, responding 22
transitions, navigating 21
user interactions, handling 21
user interface, managing 21
ViewController, lifecycle
deinit 25
initialization 23
LayoutSubviews 25
load, views 24
viewDidAppear 24
viewDidDisappear 24
viewDidLoad 24
viewIsAppearing 24
viewWillAppear 24
viewWillDisappear 24
ViewController, methods
func tableView(_:cellForRowAt:) 76
func tableView(_:numberOfROwInsection:) 75
indexPath 76
section 76
tableView 76
ViewController UI, elements
activityindicators 28
buttons 28
collectionviews 28
imageviews 28
labels 28

--- Page 551 ---
pickers 28
progressviews 28
segmented, controlling 28
sliders 28
switches 28
tableviews 28
textfields 28
viewDidAppear 22
viewDidDisappear 22
viewDidLoad() 32
ViewDidLoad() 126
viewWillAppear 22
viewWillDisappear 22
Vision Framework 168
Vision Framework, key aspects
features, accessibility 169
image, analyzing 168
ML, integrating 169
privacy 170
real-time, processing 169
text, recognition 168
Vision Framework, key classes
VNClassificationObservation 171
VNClassifyImageRequest 170
VNDetectFaceRectanglesRequest 171
VNFaceObservation 171
VNImageBasedRequest 170

--- Page 552 ---
VNImageRequestHandler 171
VNRecognizedText 172
VnRecognizeTextRequest 171
VNRequest 170
VNSequenceRequestHandler 172
 
W
 
Weather App, analyzing steps
Weather App UI, setup
WeatherView 101
Web Service, key components
Decoder 107
URLRequest 105
URLSession 105
 
X
 
Xcode 6
Xcode IDE 10
Xcode IDE, key features
app distribution, deployment 13
code, editor 10
debugging 12
documentation, resources 13
instruments 13

--- Page 553 ---
interface, building 11
project, navigating 10
simulator 12
source control, integrating 13
Xcode, installing steps
app, building 10
application, launching 7
location, saving 10
new project, creating 7
project, configuring 8
template, choosing 7
Xcode, options
bundle, identifying 9
identifier, organizing 9
interface 9
language 9
product name 9
storage 10
Xcode, setup
components, versioning 7
installing 6
password, authenticating 6
preferences, configuring 7
system requirements, checking 6
terms/conditions, utilizing 7
verifying 7
XCTAssertEqual 187

--- Page 554 ---
XCTAssertFalse 187
XCTAssertTrue 187
XCTest framework 187
XCTest framework, classes
XCTAssert 190
XCTAssertionResult 189
XCTestCase 189
XCTestExpectation 189
XCTestSuite 189
XCTest framework, fundamentals
asynchronous operation, testing 188
performance, testing 187
OceanofPDF.com