--- Page 2 ---
Take Control of iOS 18 and iPadOS 18
(1.0)
Josh Centers
Copyright © 2024, Josh Centers. All rights reserved.
ISBN: 978-1-990783-55-5
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
Table of Contents
1. Read Me First
1. Updates and More
2. Introduction
3. iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 Quick Start
4. Upgrade to iOS 18 or iPadOS 18
1. Check Your iPhone for Compatibility
2. Check Your iPad for Compatibility
3. Back Up Your Device
4. Install the Upgrade
5. Meet Apple Intelligence
1. Learn to Love Siri Again
2. Refine Your Writing with Apple Intelligence
3. Discover Other Apple Intelligence Functions
4. Create Memory Movies with Apple Intelligence
5. Create Images with Apple Intelligence
6. Edit Images with Apple Intelligence
6. Tweak the Home Screen
1. Lock and Hide Apps
2. Turn an App Shortcut into a Widget
3. Customize the Home Screen
7. Relearn Control Center
1. Customize Control Center
2. Discover Control Center Functions
8. Make Sense of the New Photos
1. View Your Photos

--- Page 4 ---
2. Access Your Albums
9. Do More with Messages
1. Add Text Effects
2. Use an Emoji or Sticker Tapback
3. Send a Message to Be Sent Later
4. Send Messages via Satellite
5. Understand RCS Support
10. Surf Safari’s New Reader
1. Explore the Page Menu
2. Peruse the Redesigned Reader
11. Try the Passwords App
1. Explore the Passwords Home Screen
2. Add or Edit a Password
3. Share Passwords with Others
4. Autofill Passwords
12. Take Notes Further
1. Record Audio in Notes
2. Attach Files to Notes
3. Use Math Notes in Notes
4. Add Collapsible Sections
5. Highlight Text
6. Try Smart Script
13. Hike with Maps
1. Understand the Library
2. Search Here
3. Explore Topographic Maps and Trail Networks
4. Create Custom Walking and Hiking Routes
14. Power Up Calculator
1. Convert with Calculator

--- Page 5 ---
2. Use Math Notes in Calculator
3. View Calculator History
15. Journal with Journal
1. Sort and Search Journal Entries
2. Add Journal Widgets to the Home Screen
3. View Journal Stats
4. Journal for Wellbeing
16. Discover Other App Changes
1. Calendar
2. Files
3. Fitness+
4. Freeform
5. Home
6. Mail
7. Music
8. Phone
9. TV
10. Wallet
17. Discover Other System Changes
1. Accessibility
2. AirPods
3. Apple ID Is Now Apple Account
4. Game Mode
5. Contact Sharing
6. Emergency SOS Live Video
7. Flashlight
8. iPad
9. Paste Links Over Text
10. SharePlay
18. About This Book

--- Page 6 ---
1. Ebook Extras
2. About the Author
3. About the Publisher
19. Copyright and Fine Print
1. Title Page
2. Cover
3. Table of Contents
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
Read Me First
Welcome to Take Control of iOS 18 and iPadOS 18, version 1.0, published
in August 2024 by alt concepts. This book was written by Josh Centers and
edited by Joe Kissell.
This book covers the new features of iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 to give iPhone
and iPad veterans a quick start for all of the new features these operating
systems have to offer.
If you want to share this ebook with a friend, we ask that you do so as you
would with a physical book: “lend” it for a quick look, but ask your friend
to buy a copy for careful reading or reference. Discounted classroom and
user group copies are available.
Copyright © 2024, Josh Centers. All rights reserved.
Updates and More
You can access extras related to this ebook on the web (use the link in
Ebook Extras, near the end; it’s available only to purchasers). On the
ebook’s Take Control Extras page, you can:
Download any available new version of the ebook for free, or buy any
subsequent edition at a discount.

--- Page 8 ---
Access the book in both PDF and EPUB formats. (Learn about reading
on mobile devices on our Device Advice page.)
Read the ebook’s blog. You may find new tips or information, as well as
a link to an author interview.
If you bought this ebook from the Take Control website, it has been added
to your account, where you can download it in other formats and access any
future updates.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction
Henry Ford famously said the Model T was available in “any color the
customer wants, as long as it’s black.” Steve Jobs maintained a similar
stance during his long reigns at Apple. On the hardware front, the fewer
models Apple could offer, the better. Apple software under Jobs was
“opinionated.” Customization was set aside to focus on consistency and
simplicity.
For better or worse, that philosophy is officially out the window with iOS
18 and iPadOS 18. Much has been spoken of Apple Intelligence, but after a
whirlwind summer with these new releases, I’ve identified three key themes
most users will experience: Customization, customization, and
customization. Here are three major examples:
The Home Screen is more customizable than ever. Icons and widgets are
no longer constrained to a predefined grid. You now arrange them
however you please. You can also apply color filters to app icons,
completely overriding the designer’s vision.
Control Center is now completely customizable. You can add and
remove controls to your heart’s content, and if you run out of room, you
can add multiple pages to swipe between.
Even Photos has a certain degree of customization. You can customize
the new single-screen interface to move things around as you like.

--- Page 10 ---
I worry that these changes will cause massive confusion for users because
there’s no longer a shared, consistent experience. An individualized iOS
experience is a more fragmented one.
However, this is clearly what the market is craving. iOS customization is
one of the hottest topics on TikTok and other social networks. In many
ways, it hearkens back to the old days of computing when users skinned
and themed software to suit their tastes. For better or worse, iOS 18 and
iPadOS 18 are uniquely yours.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 11 ---
iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 Quick Start
iOS 18 and iPadOS 18’s features can be split into three broad categories:
increased customization, new intelligence features, and minor updates to
existing apps and features:
Customize iOS 18 and iPadOS 18:
Tweak the Home Screen with new theming and app-placement options.
Relearn Control Center, which is now 100% customizable.
Get smarter with iOS 18 and iPadOS 18:
Meet Apple Intelligence and the AI features coming to Apple’s high-end
devices.
Surf Safari’s New Reader with new features like voice transcripts of
articles and Apple Intelligence summaries.
Check out new Accessibility features like Vocal Shortcuts, Eye Tracking,
and Music Haptics.
Check out new and overhauled apps:
Make Sense of the New Photos and its new single-screen interface.
Try the Passwords App, which is Apple’s built-in password-management
solution.

--- Page 12 ---
Power Up Calculator with new features like conversions and Math
Notes.
Explore updates to old favorites:
Do More with Messages like adding Text Effects, custom Tapback
responses, scheduling messages for later, and RCS messaging with
Android phones.
Hike with Maps, taking advantage of its new hiking trails feature.
Journal with Journal with new features to organize your journal and track
your journaling stats.
Take Notes Further with voice recordings, Math Notes, highlighting, and
collapsible sections.
Last but not least: Discover Other App Changes and Discover Other
System Changes for other improvements that didn’t belong elsewhere.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 13 ---
Upgrade to iOS 18 or iPadOS 18
Before you proceed with the upgrade, you should know if your devices can
support iOS 18 and iPadOS 18, what to do before you update, and, of
course, how to perform the update.
Check Your iPhone for Compatibility
iOS 18 runs on any of these iPhone models:
iPhone 11 series or later
iPhone XS series
iPhone SE (2nd generation or later)
However, certain features require more than the bare minimum hardware:
Apple Intelligence: Apple’s new artificial intelligence features require
an iPhone 15 Pro, iPhone 15 Pro Max, or later.
Messages via Satellite: This feature lets you send iMessages over
satellite when you don’t have an internet connection, and it requires an
iPhone 14 or later.
Siri Interactions: These let you shake or nod your head to respond to
requests, and they require AirPods Pro (2nd generation) and later.
Personalized spatial audio for gaming: Many newer games will
support the personalized spatial audio feature, which is available on

--- Page 14 ---
AirPods (3rd generation), AirPods Pro, and AirPods Max.
Live audio transcription in Notes: You can record voice memos in
Notes and have them transcribed on the iPhone 12 and later.
Enhance dialog: This is a new feature in the TV app that makes it easier
to understand what people are saying. It’s available in compatible
content using built-in speakers, wired headphones, AirPods, and other
Bluetooth-connected speakers and headphones on iPhone 11 and later.
HomeKit guest access: Home now lets you give guests access to
automated locks. It requires a HomePod or Apple TV operating as a
Home hub and a Matter lock that supports schedules.
HomeKit hands-free unlock: You can now automatically unlock
HomeKit locks as you draw near them with an iPhone 11 and later, and
compatible Ultra Wideband locks.
Eye tracking: This is a new accessibility feature that lets you control
your iPhone with your eyes, and it’s available on iPhone 12 and later, as
well as the iPhone SE (3rd generation).
Music Haptics: This feature vibrates the phone along with whatever
music is playing, and it’s available on iPhone 12 and later.
Check Your iPad for Compatibility
iPadOS runs on any of these iPad models:
iPad Pro (M4)
iPad Pro 12.9-inch (3rd generation and later)

--- Page 15 ---
iPad Pro 11-inch (1st generation and later)
iPad Air (3rd generation and later, including M2)
iPad (7th generation and later)
iPad mini (5th generation and later)
Some features require more hardware:
Apple Intelligence: M1 processor or later.
Siri Interactions: AirPods Pro (2nd generation) and later.
Personalized Spatial Audio for gaming: Available on AirPods (3rd
generation), AirPods Pro, and AirPods Max.
Notes live audio transcription: iPhone 12 and later.
Smart Script: This is a new Notes feature that learns your handwriting
style and makes it more legible. It’s available on:
iPad Pro (M4)
iPad Pro 12.9-inch (5th generation and later)
iPad Pro 11-inch (3rd generation and later)
iPad Air (M2)
iPad Air 10.9-inch (4th generation and later)
iPad (10th generation)
iPad mini (6th generation)
Eye tracking: Available on:
iPad Pro (M4)
iPad Pro 12.9-inch (5th generation and later)
iPad Pro 11-inch (3rd generation and later)

--- Page 16 ---
iPad (10th generation)
iPad Air (M2)
iPad Air (3rd generation and later)
iPad mini (6th generation).
Guest access: Available with a HomePod or Apple TV operating as a
home hub alongside a Matter lock that supports schedules.
Back Up Your Device
Before upgrading to iOS 18 or iPadOS 18, it’s imperative that you back up
the data on your device, which you can either do with iCloud or with a Mac
or Windows PC.
Backing Up with iCloud
I recommend iCloud backup as I’ve found it to be better supported by
Apple than backing up to a local computer, and as such it tends to work
better and be more reliable. To back up with iCloud:
1. Go to Settings > Your Name > iCloud > iCloud Backup.
2. Enable Back Up This iPhone or Back Up This iPad if it’s not already
enabled, and then tap Back Up Now.
Under the Back Up Now option, it should say when the last backup was
successfully completed. Make sure your backup is recent before
proceeding.

--- Page 17 ---
Note: iCloud Backup pretty much requires paying for extra storage through iCloud+. The cheapest
tier is usually plenty for backing up a couple of devices.
Backing Up to a Mac
Here’s how to back up locally to your Mac:
1. Connect your iPhone or iPad to your Mac with a USB cable.
2. Open Finder on the Mac.
3. Click your device in Finder’s sidebar.
4. If prompted, click Trust on your Mac and tap Trust on your iPhone or
iPad. Enter your device passcode if necessary.
5. Click the General tab in Finder and select”Back up all of the data on
your iPhone/iPad to this Mac.”
6. Click Back Up Now.
Backing Up to a Windows PC
To back up to a Windows PC, you’ll need to first install iTunes. Then:
1. Connect your iPhone or iPad to your PC with a USB cable.
2. Open iTunes.
3. If prompted, click Continue on your PC and tap Trust on your iPhone or
iPad. Enter your device passcode if necessary.
4. Click the device icon in the upper-left corner of the iTunes window.

--- Page 18 ---
5. Go to Summary in the sidebar and select This Computer.
6. Click Back Up Now.
Install the Upgrade
Installing the upgrade to iOS 18 or iPadOS 18 is simple enough:
1. Go to Settings > General > Software Update.
2. Tap either Install Now or Download and Install.
Note: If you don’t have enough room on your device, you’ll be prompted to offload some apps until
after the install. Your app data is be saved, the apps are temporarily deleted, and then automatically
reinstalled with your data after the update.
It will take a while to download and install the update. If Apple’s servers are
especially busy, you may have to be patient. Here are some tips:
1. Set aside at least a couple of hours for the update to download, verify,
and install.
2. Perform the update in the off hours—maybe as you lie down for bed.
3. Update only one device at a time.
4. Keep your device plugged in to AC power.
When the update is complete, you’re taken through a series of prompts
informing and asking about various features. My only general

--- Page 19 ---
recommendation here is to deny anything related to analytics or data
collection. Besides the possible (albeit mild) privacy implications, it’s an
unnecessary drain on processing and battery power.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 20 ---
Meet Apple Intelligence
The hot topic right now is AI—that’s right, Apple Intelligence. On the one
hand, it’s Apple’s marquee feature this season. On the other, it’s limited to
only a handful of devices—see Check Your iPhone for Compatibility and
Check Your iPad for Compatibility.
There’s a lot of confusion and misinformation about Apple Intelligence,
unfortunately due in part to the way Apple announced it. Apple Intelligence
doesn’t just piggyback on OpenAI’s GPT technology—though Apple
Intelligence will be able to integrate with GPT and similar models down the
road. For much of Apple Intelligence, Apple uses their own internal
technology, either processed on your device, or—when that isn’t possible—
through Apple’s Private Cloud Compute technology, which privately and
securely processes your requests on a remote server.
Apple Intelligence is baked into many aspects of iOS 18—specifically, iOS
18.1, though not all of the promised features will arrive even with that
update. Expect more features to roll out throughout the lifespan of iOS 18.
Note: In the iOS 18.1 developer beta, you had to opt in to the Apple Intelligence beta, even if you
owned a compatible device. If that’s still in the case once released, you can join the waitlist in
Settings > Apple Intelligence & Siri.

--- Page 21 ---
Learn to Love Siri Again
The most obvious Apple Intelligence-related improvements come to Siri.
First, the interface is slightly different. The now-familiar Siri orb is gone.
Instead, when Siri is invoked, the edges of the screen light up with a
multicolored glow.
For now, Siri’s improved intelligence is rather subtle. Siri can understand
you better if you stutter or change your mind in mid-sentence. It can better
follow multiple queries. For instance, you can ask how long it takes to drive
to Yosemite, what the weather is like there, and what food places are
nearby, and Siri can keep up with you and keep things in context.
Siri now also has product knowledge baked in. You can ask it things like
“How do I turn off a Focus” or “How do I schedule a text message for
later?” (Figure 1)

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 1: You can ask Siri how to use your Apple device.
In the future, Siri will draw upon Apple Intelligence and other technologies
like GPT for smarter and better results. Siri will be able to search and
interact with the information on your device to save time through two
methods:
Personal Context: Siri will be able to pull data from your device to help
with actions and answer questions. For instance, it will be able to look
up information you have stored in your email or in a note.
Onscreen awareness and app actions: Siri will be able to interact
directly with elements displayed on your screen and let you take actions
in apps without opening them.

--- Page 23 ---
TYPE TO SIRI
For years, Apple has clumsily tried to integrate Siri and Spotlight search so you can type Siri queries.
With Apple Intelligence, Apple has finally cracked it with the new Type to Siri feature. Simply
double-tap on the bottom edge of the screen and an Ask Siri field appears (Figure 2).
Figure 2: You can now type directly to Siri with Apple Intelligence.
Type in your Siri query just as if you were speaking it and tap the send 
 button to submit it. Just
like regular Siri, you can ask follow-up questions. Swipe up from the bottom of the screen to dismiss
it.
Refine Your Writing with Apple Intelligence
One reason AI has taken off is that it can improve your writing, or even do
your writing for you. Apple Intelligence in iOS 18.1 offers three new
features to help you write better and more efficiently Proofread, Rewrite,

--- Page 24 ---
and Writing Tools. To access them, select some text you have drafted. The
three options appear in the QuickType bar above your keyboard (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Select text and the Apple Intelligence writing tools appear above your keyboard.
Proofread with Apple Intelligence
The Proofread option scans your text for misspellings, grammatical errors,
and other potential missteps. It applies the changes automatically,
underlining where it has made changes.
A panel at the bottom lets you adjust the edit. Tap the up and down arrows
to cycle through the changes. If you don’t like the changes, tap Use Original
to override the currently selected change. Tap the Original button to
alternate between the original text and the Apple Intelligence edit (Figure
4).

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 4: Apple Intelligence’s Proofread feature scans for grammatical, spelling, and tone
issues and makes edits automatically.
When you’re finished, tap Done to accept the changes or Revert to undo
them.
Rewrite with Apple Intelligence
The Rewrite option in iOS 18.1 automatically rewrites text to be clearer. A
panel appears at the bottom, with fewer options than the Proofread panel.

--- Page 26 ---
Here you can tap Retry to give it another go or Original to see the changes.
Again, tap Revert to undo the changes or Done to accept them (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Rewrite is practically automatic. There’s little to do here.
Leverage Writing Tools
Proofread and Rewrite are a bit oversimplified. If you tap the Apple
Intelligence 
 icon in the QuickType bar, it reveals the Writing Tools panel,
with a full range of writing and editing options (Figure 6).

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 6: The Writing Tools panel exposes all the text tools Apple Intelligence has to offer.
We’ve already covered the Proofread and Rewrite options. Let’s explore the
others:
Friendly: This rewrites the text for a friendlier tone. The controls are the
same as for the Rewrite command above (Figure 5).
Professional: This rewrites for a professional tone.
Concise: The Concise option rewrites to cut out all filler and get to the
point.
Summary: This creates a summary of the text. The panel at the bottom
displays the summary, and lets you either copy it, replace the selected
text with the summary, or share it with others (Figure 7).

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 7: You can choose whether to send the summary elsewhere or replace the
existing text.
Key Points: Much like the Summary option, Key Points creates a bullet
list summarizing the text (Figure 8).
Figure 8: Key Points makes bullet points of your text, ideal for emails to busy people.

--- Page 29 ---
List: This converts the text to a bullet list with controls identical to
Figure 5.
Table: This takes the high points of your text and puts them into a table
with controls identical to Figure 5.
Take Advantage of Smart Replies
The QuickType bar has suggested text for years, but the Apple Intelligence
Smart Replies feature takes it to the next level. In Messages and Mail,
automated responses based on the context of the message appear in a purple
hue (Figure 9). Tap one to insert it as a response.
Figure 9: Smart Replies help save time answering questions.
Discover Other Apple Intelligence Functions
Apple Intelligence in iOS 18.1 has many other tricks up its sleeve. Here’s a
sample of what to look for.

--- Page 30 ---
Summarizing Mail and Messages
A new feature in Mail—and allegedly in Messages—is the new Summarize
feature, which summarizes long emails and messages. Be on the lookout for
the Summarize 
 icon.
In Mail, brief email summaries now appear below the subject line in your
Inbox (Figure 10).
Figure 10: Mail summarizes messages in your Inbox.
While viewing an email, tap the Summarize button in the upper-right corner
to display a summary of the email at the top of the screen (Figure 11).

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 11: Mail can summarize an email.
Spotting Priority Emails and Priority Notifications
Mail identifies what it thinks are important emails, places them at the top of
your Inbox, and labels them priority (Figure 12). It does the same for what
it perceives to be important system notifications.
Figure 12: AI spotlights emails and notifications it thinks you need to see.

--- Page 32 ---
Reducing Interruptions
Alongside Priority Notifications, Apple Intelligence offers a new Focus
mode called Reduce Interruptions, which tries to intelligently filter your
notifications so you only get what’s important. For example, a message
from your spouse might make the cut, but a social media notification may
not.
You can enable Reduce Interruptions from Control Center (see Relearn
Control Center). Like any other Focus, you can adjust its settings in
Settings > Focus > Reduce Interruptions.
Recording and transcribing phone calls
You can now record phone calls to the Notes app, and Apple Intelligence
creates a transcript automatically.
During a call, tap the recording 
 icon in the upper-left corner to record a
call. Be sure to tell the other party first, because after a brief countdown, it
announces that the call will be recorded.
After that announcement, you receive a Notes notification you can tap to
open the note with the recording to add additional notes. A recording box
the appears on the call screen, with a stop 
 button for when you want to
stop the recording—that also triggers an announcement that recording has
ended (Figure 13).

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 13: You can take notes about the call as it records.

--- Page 34 ---
To view your recording afterward, open the Notes app. A special section is
set aside for Call Recordings. Tap a note to see the recording embedded
inside, along with an Apple Intelligence summary of the conversation
(Figure 14).
Figure 14: Call Recording has its own section in Notes. Tap the related note to see the call
embedded inside.
Tap the play 
 button to play back the call recording. You can tap the gray
area of the embedded recording to open it full-screen, which reveals the
transcript 
 button, which you can tap to see the transcript. The transcript
follows along with the recording as it plays, and you can tap a word to jump
to that section.
Also see Record Audio in Notes.

--- Page 35 ---
Transcribing Voice Memos
The Voice Memos app now automatically transcribes your recordings. Look
for the transcript icon on a recording. To view the transcript:
1. Tap the recording to expand it.
2. Tap the audio 
 icon.
3. Tap the transcript 
 icon to reveal the transcript.
While viewing the transcript, you can select text as you normally would. As
you scroll through the transcript, a Search button appears that lets you
search the transcript.
If you scroll up and tap the play 
 icon, the transcript follows along with
the audio, and you can tap a word to jump to that section of the recording.
Create Memory Movies with Apple Intelligence
Apple Intelligence in iOS 18.1 can create a Memory Movie in response to a
simple text description:
1. Open Photos.
2. Scroll down to Memories.
3. Tap “Describe a memory…” under Create a Memory Movie.
Alternatively, you can tap Create next to Memories (Figure 15).
4. Enter a description and tap the send 
 button.

--- Page 36 ---
5. Photos makes a big show of searching through your photo library. When
it’s done thinking, it shows your new Memory Movie.
Figure 15: You can create Memory Movies with a simple description of what you want it to
include. It offers personalized suggestions to get you started.
Create Images with Apple Intelligence
There are two more Apple Intelligence features still in the works that let
you create images in future versions of iOS 18/iPadOS 18:
Image Wand: With this, you can draw a rough sketch in notes, and then
circle it with the Image Wand tool to transform it into an Apple
Intelligence-generated image.

--- Page 37 ---
Genmoji: The Genmoji feature will let you use Apple Intelligence
prompting to create your own emojis.
Edit Images with Apple Intelligence
Starting in iOS 18.1, an Apple Intelligence feature called Clean Up lets you
“magically” delete unwanted objects in photos. Here’s how to try it:
1. Open a photo in the Photos app.
2. Tap the edit 
 icon.
3. Tap Clean Up 
.
Then either brush, circle, or tap the elements you want to replace, which are
erased and then filled in with an AI approximation of what it thinks should
be there. Sometimes this works amazingly well. Somethings the results can
be horrific.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 38 ---
Tweak the Home Screen
iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 introduce many new options to adjust your Home
Screen. You can now lock and even hide sensitive apps from prying eyes.
You can easily transform an app shortcut into a widget and back again. And
there are many new options for customization.
Tip: You can now position apps and widgets anywhere you like on the Home Screen, without any
forced arrangement.
Lock and Hide Apps
You can lock apps so they cannot be opened without authenticating with
Face ID or Touch ID, which adds an extra layer of security to sensitive apps
related to things like banking and journaling.
Additionally, you can also hide an app so that it doesn’t appear on the
Home Screen. Instead, it’s moved to an obscured Hidden folder in the App
Library that cannot be viewed without Face ID or Touch ID authentication
(Figure 16).

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 16: You can store sensitive apps in the mysterious Hidden folder of the App Library.
To lock or hide an app:
1. Touch and hold an app icon.
2. Tap Require Face/Touch ID.
3. Choose either Require Face/Touch ID or Hide and Require Face/Touch
ID. The former merely locks the app; the latter hides it.
4. Authenticate with Face ID or Touch ID.
5. If you also chose to hide the app, tap Hide App.
To remove the lock or unhide the app:
1. Touch and hold the app’s icon. Hidden apps are found in the App Library
in the Hidden folder.
2. Choose Don’t Require Face/Touch ID from the menu.

--- Page 40 ---
Turn an App Shortcut into a Widget
If an app has an associated widget, you can now quickly transform the app’s
icon into a widget and vice versa on the Home Screen:
1. Touch and hold the app’s icon on the Home Screen.
2. Near the top of the menu, tap one of the icons for the app icon 
 or
widgets 
 
  (Figure 17).
Figure 17: The icons in the second row let you choose whether to display the app on the
Home Screen as an icon or one of two sizes of widget.
Customize the Home Screen
iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 introduce new ways to style and theme your Home
Screen. Touch and hold an empty section of the Home Screen, tap Edit in
the upper-left corner, and choose Customize.

--- Page 41 ---
Here are the new options and what they do:
Small vs. large: At the top are two tabs labeled small and large. The
small icons are the traditional smaller app icons with app names
underneath. Tap large and the icons grow in size without the app name
(Figure 18).
Figure 18: Large icons eschew the app name for a bigger icon.
Dark mode icons: Additionally, you can set a dark theme for icons.
Automatic sets this automatically depending on whether you’re in Light
Mode or Dark Mode. Dark makes the icons dark—for instance, white
backgrounds become black (Figure 19).
Tapping the sun 
 icon while dark is enabled darkens the wallpaper as
well. Choosing Light displays the icons as you’re used to them.

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 19: How Dark Mode icons look.
Tinted: The Tinted option lets you add a custom tint to all app icons
(Figure 20). The sliders let you adjust the color and hue of the icons.
Again, the sun 
 icon darkens the wallpaper.
Figure 20: You can add a custom color tint to your app icons.
Additionally, you can use the color 
 picker to choose a color from your
wallpaper so the icon tint matches your background:
1. Tap the color 
 picker.
2. The screen blurs and a color 
 picker grid appears on screen.

--- Page 43 ---
3. Drag the color picker around the screen to pick a color. The selected
color is shown in the innermost square.
4. When you let go of the color picker, whatever color is in that center
square is selected as the icon tint.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 44 ---
Relearn Control Center
Apple has completely redesigned Control Center in iOS 18 and iPadOS 18
to be 100% customizable. Previously, you could add and remove certain
controls, but many were baked in—whether you used them or not. Control
Center now has multiple pages you can switch among by swiping up and
down on the screen.
In the long run, the new Control Center will be a blessing, but for now it
means taking time to set things up how you want them and retraining your
muscle memory.
To access Control Center on iPhones without Home buttons and on iPads,
swipe down from the upper-right corner of the screen (Figure 21). On
iPhones with Home buttons, swipe up from the bottom of the screen.

--- Page 45 ---
Figure 21: Control Center gives you quick access to network settings, brightness, audio
controls, and more. To see additional options, touch and hold a control.
Tip: Tap the Power 
 icon in Control Center to reveal the “slide to power off” slide. This also
temporarily disables Face ID and Touch ID.
Customize Control Center
Control Center is composed of three types of controls: buttons, sliders, and
platters (groups of buttons). As you resize those controls, they may change
shape. For instance, a slider might turn into a button.

--- Page 46 ---
You can touch and hold many Control Center controls to reveal a panel with
more functions.
Control Center is completely customizable: you can add, remove, and
rearrange any controls you want. Also, you can have multiple pages in
Control Center you can swipe through—as many as will fit on the screen.
To customize Control Center, touch and hold an empty spot on the screen.
Then you can:
Add a control: Tap Add a Control at the bottom of the page and tap one
of the controls.
Add a screen 
 : Tap the new screen 
 icon to the right of Control
Center (or swipe to the bottom) and add a control.
Move a control: Touch, hold, and drag the control to a new position.
Resize a control: Touch, hold, and drag the drag handle in the lower-
right corner of the control.
Delete a control 
 : Tap the delete 
 button on a control.
Remove a screen: Delete all the controls from that screen.
Exit edit mode: Swipe up from the bottom of the screen.
Discover Control Center Functions
Here are the control categories, which controls are in each one, and what
each of the controls do.

--- Page 47 ---
Note: Since many of the controls can be resized, and they change shape and form as they’re resized, I
explain the various control functions but have to be a little vague about their positioning.
Accessibility Controls
The Accessibility section has a small subset of the accessibility features:
Accessibility Shortcuts 
: Tap this icon to quickly access Accessibility
features. You can choose what appears here in Settings > Accessibility >
Accessibility Shortcut.
Assistive Access 
: Assistive Access presents a simplified version of the
interface with big buttons and limited gestures. If Assistive Access has
been set up in Settings > Accessibility > Assistive Access, this button
enables it. However, once Assistive Access is on, you can’t access
Control Center, so you have to triple-click the side/top button to turn it
off.
Guided Access 
: The Guided Access control enables Guided Access
for the current app, which limits the device to display only that one app.
Until Guided Access is turned off, the user is stuck in the designated app,
which is handy for young children. Set it up in Settings > Accessibility >
Guided Access.
Live Speech 
: Live Speech lets you type things and have them
sounded out. If Live Speech is enabled in Settings > Accessibility > Live

--- Page 48 ---
Speech, this button triggers it, which adds a text bubble on the screen
you can type into.
Capture
Capture collects all the ways your device can accept visual input:
Camera 
: Tap this button to open the Camera app. Touch and hold it
to reveal specific Camera modes that vary depending on device.
Magnifier 
 : Tap this button to open the super-handy Magnifier feature,
which uses your camera like a magnifying glass, letting you zoom in on
small text and other hard-to-see things. On newer devices it also has a
Detection Mode that can identify objects and read signs.
Scan Code 
: Tap this button to open a scanner for QR codes. The
Camera app can read those codes.
Clock
The Clock controls let you set alarms and timers, and access the stopwatch:
Alarm 
: Tap this button to open the Clock app to the Alarm tab. Touch
and hold to reveal a menu where you can create an alarm, start a
stopwatch, or start a timer.
Stopwatch 
: Tap this button to open the Clock app to the Stopwatch
tab. Touch and hold to reveal a menu where you can create an alarm,
start a stopwatch, or start a timer.

--- Page 49 ---
Timer 
 : Tapping this button opens up the Clock app to the Timer tab.
Handy for cooking! Touch and hold to quickly set a timer between one
minute and two hours.
Connectivity
The Connectivity platter lets you quickly turn various networking features
of your device on and off. There are also separate controls for Airplane
Mode, Cellular Data, Personal Hotspot, and Satellite. Here’s what all the
controls here do:
Airplane Mode 
: Tap this button to turn off all radios except for
Bluetooth. An airplane 
 icon appears in the upper-left corner of the
screen, on the status bar, when Airplane mode is on.
Note: Once you turn on Airplane mode, you can re-enable Wi-Fi and/or Bluetooth, so an airplane
 icon in your status bar does not necessarily mean all connections are disabled.
Use Airplane mode to comply with airline regulations or to reduce
battery usage.
AirDrop 
 : Tap this button to choose who can send you AirDrop
content: no one, only your contacts, or everyone. Contacts Only is a safe
choice, because you can receive AirDrop content from people you know,
but won’t get nefarious stuff from strangers.
Wi-Fi 
 : Tap this button to turn Wi-Fi connectivity off or on.

--- Page 50 ---
Cellular Data 
: Tap the this button to disable all cellular connectivity,
including voice.
Bluetooth 
: Tap this button to enable or disable it. If you’re not using
Bluetooth, leave it off to save battery.
Personal Hotspot 
: If you have an iPhone—or an iPad with a cellular
radio—and your carrier supports this feature, tap this button to share
your device’s cellular connection over Wi-Fi. Your other devices can
connect to your iPhone or iPad like any other Wi-Fi access point.
Devices signed in to your iCloud account can connect without a
password. Other devices require the password, which you can find on
your Personal Hotspot device in Settings > Personal Hotspot.
Warning! If your cellular data plan has a cap, you could blow through it quickly using Personal
Hotspot!
Satellite 
: This triggers the satellite messaging features available in the
iPhone 14 and later like Emergency SOS via satellite and Send Messages
via Satellite.
VPN 
: A VPN is a virtual private network, which reroutes your online
connection—often for security purposes. If you have one set up in
Settings > General > VPN & Device Management, this button enables
whichever VPN is selected there.

--- Page 51 ---
Display & Brightness
Here are the display-related controls in Control Center:
Brightness 
  
 : Adjust the slider to a comfortable level. You can also
automatically keep the brightness at an appropriate level: visit Settings >
Accessibility > Display & Text Size to access the Auto-Brightness
switch.
Touch and hold the brightness slider to reveal three other buttons:
Dark Mode 
: Tap this button to turn Dark Mode on and off.
Night Shift 
: Night Shift warms the colors of your display to make
it easier to sleep. Tap the button once to either schedule Night Shift or
manually turn it on until 7 A.M. Tap it again to turn Night Shift off.
You can adjust Night Shift settings in Settings > Display &
Brightness > Night Shift.
True Tone 
 : True Tone (available on select devices) adjusts the
display to maintain consistent color presentation in different lighting
situations.
Orientation Lock 
  : Tap this button to lock the screen’s orientation
and prevent it from rotating when you physically rotate the device.
Screen Mirroring 
 : Tapping this button lets you select an AirPlay
receiver to mirror your device’s screen to. To stop mirroring, tap Screen
Mirroring again and tap Stop Mirroring.
Note: For more about AirPlay, read my book Take Control of Apple TV.

--- Page 52 ---
Screen Recording 
: Tap this button to begin recording your screen
after a three-second countdown. The control’s icon turns red while
recording. Tap it again to stop. Touch and hold the control to reveal
options for where to send the recording and to turn the microphone on or
off, which is handy if you want to narrate your screen recording.
Text Size 
: Slide up and down to increase or decrease the system text
size. Tap the text size control to reveal a full-screen slider that also lets
you switch between controlling text size in all apps or only the current
one.
Focus
Tap the button to choose a Focus, or tap the icon 
 on the button to enable
the currently selected Focus, which prevents notification alerts, FaceTime
calls, and phone calls from disturbing you with noise, vibration, or your
screen’s backlight. Timers and alarms set in the Clock app override Do Not
Disturb.
Hearing Accessibility
Apple has a special section just for hearing accessibility features:
Background Sounds 
: Background sounds is like a white noise
generator for your device. Tap this button to turn on the sound. Touch
and hold it to select different sounds and change the volume.

--- Page 53 ---
Headphone Accommodations 
: This setting lets you customize the
sound settings for Apple and Beats earbuds and headphones, which you
can tune in Settings > Accessibility > Audio & Visual > Headphone
Accommodations. Tapping this button in Control Center lets you enable
or disable it individually for phone sounds and media.
Headphone Levels 
: This control displays the current volume of your
headphone audio, in decibels.
Hearing 
: This button gives you access to several settings at once:
Background Sounds, Headphone Accommodations, and Live Listen.
Left-Right Stereo Balance 
: You can adjust the balance between the
left and right audio channels in Settings > Accessibility > Audio &
Visual. The Left-Right Stereo Balance button toggles the setting.
Live Captions 
: Live Captions enables or disables a floating window
that listens for audio on your device and transcribes it in the window.
Live Listen 
: If you have AirPods connected, this button lets you
toggle the Live Listen feature, which turns your AirPods into a listening
device, with the iPhone or iPad acting as a microphone.
Music Haptics 
: This button enables a feature that vibrates the phone
to the tune of whatever music is playing, so the hearing impaired can still
experience it. Try Music Haptics.
Sound Recognition 
: This button triggers an accessibility feature that
listens for certain sounds—like alarms, crying babies, glass breaking,
and pets—and alerts you if your device hears them. Tap it once to turn
on the feature. Touch and hold to select the sounds to listen for. Siri

--- Page 54 ---
doesn’t work when Sound Recognition is enabled. Adjust settings in
Settings > Accessibility > Sound Recognition.
Home Controls
If you have HomeKit home automation accessories, the Home 
 controls
give you quick access to controlling your accessories and scenes. Check out
Take Control of Apple Home Automation for a complete guide to HomeKit.
There are three Home controls, of which two are labeled Home. Here’s
what each one does:
The first Home control is a platter that tries to show you the accessories
and scenes it thinks you’ll want to use at any given time. Tap the icon on
an accessory’s button to turn it on or off. Tap the button outside the icon
to see advanced controls, such as light brightness. The larger you make
this control, the more accessories and scenes it shows.
The second one, named Scene or Accessory, is a widget that lets you
create a custom shortcut any accessory or scene you want. Tap it before
dismissing editing mode to change what the button controls.
The second Home 
 control just opens the Home app. Touch and hold it
to see a quick menu of scenes.

--- Page 55 ---
Motor Accessibility
Control Center provides shortcuts to several accessibility features focused
on motor function:
Apple Watch Mirroring (iPhone only) 
: If you have an Apple Watch
connected, tapping this button reveals a panel that shows your watch’s
display on the iPhone’s screen.
AssistiveTouch 
: AssistiveTouch lets you emulate button presses and
gestures from a control panel. Tap this button to display a floating white
 button on the screen that you can tap to reveal the menu. You can
customize the menu in Settings > Accessibility > Touch >
AssistiveTouch.
Control Nearby Devices 
: Tap this button and choose another Apple
device, like a nearby iPhone, that you’d like to control remotely.
Controls for that device are displayed on screen.
Eye Tracking 
: This activates a feature for newer iPhones that lets you
control an onscreen pointer with your eyes. Tapping this engages a
calibration mode that you can’t exit—you must stare at a moving dot on
the screen until the process is finished. See Control Your Device with
Your Eyes.
Full Keyboard Access 
 : This feature lets you control onscreen
elements with an external keyboard—either connected via USB or paired
over Bluetooth in Settings > Bluetooth.

--- Page 56 ---
Switch Control 
 : This feature lets you control your device with an
external switch. Onscreen elements are slowly cycled through and you
can use the switch to activate them. You can set this up in Settings >
Accessibility > Switch Control.
Voice Control 
 : This button audibly reads onscreen elements and
anything you tap to select.
Notes
Control Center offers a couple of controls for the Notes app:
Notes 
: Tapping this button while your device is unlocked opens the
Notes app. But tap it while your phone is locked to create an Instant
Note, which is like a regular note, except that it’s accessible from the
Lock Screen for an amount of time set in Settings > Notes > Access
Notes from Lock Screen.
Touch and hold the Notes button to reveal these options:
New Note 
: Open Notes with a new note.
New Checklist 
: Open a new note with a checklist already created.
New Photo 
: Create a new note and open the Camera to capture an
image for the note.
Scan Document 
: Scan a document with the camera and add it to a
note.
Tip: To learn much more about Notes, see my book Take Control of Notes.

--- Page 57 ---
Quick Note 
: Tap this button to open a window that lets you jot down
a note without having to open the Notes app and tap an icon to create a
new note. These notes are saved to the Quick Notes folder in the Notes
app.
Now Playing
The media platter lets you control background audio, such as music and
podcasts, as well as playback on AirPlay devices like the Apple TV and
HomePod. The platter shows the following:
Track information: For music, the platter shows the track and artist.
When playing a podcast, it shows the episode title and the show name.
Skip buttons: When playing music, these display as previous 
 and
next track 
 buttons. If a podcast is playing, they appear as skip 
 
buttons, which are handy for catching a line you missed or bypassing
ads. Other apps may present different icons here.
Play/Pause: These buttons 
/
  simply play or pause the audio.
Output: Tap the Output 
 icon in the upper-right corner to choose an
audio or AirPlay video output.
Tapping the platter reveals three more controls:
Favorite: Add 
 this track to your Apple Music favorites.
Scrubber: This shows how far you are into an audio track and the total
duration. Drag the white knob to change the playback position.

--- Page 58 ---
Volume: Drag the white knob to adjust the playback volume.
Tap Control Other Speakers & TVs and then tap a device to switch to
controlling that device. Even after exiting that screen, the Media Platter’s
controls continue affecting that device until you switch it.
Remote
Tap Apple TV Remote 
 to reveal a virtual remote that you can use to
control your Apple TV HD or Apple TV 4K. You can select which device
you control at the top of the screen.
Shortcuts
These two controls give you quick access to any app or shortcut. To set
these controls, tap one after placing it on the screen but before leaving edit
mode and then choose the app or shortcut you want that control to open.
Open App 
: Tapping this button opens the associated app.
Shortcuts 
: This button triggers the selected shortcut.
Sounds
These two controls let you recognize music or adjust the system volume:

--- Page 59 ---
Recognize Music 
: What’s the name of that tune? This turns on built-
in Shazam song recognition, which listens to a song through the
microphone and tries to identify it. (Apple owns Shazam.)
Volume 
: Adjust the system volume to a comfortable level. Touch and
hold the slider to see a larger volume control on an iPhone.
Translate
The translate 
 button just opens the Translate app.
Utilities
Announce Notifications 
: If you have AirPods or CarPlay paired with
a device, this feature audibly announces notifications as you receive
them.
Calculator 
 : Tap this button to open the Calculator app. Touch and
hold it to reveal an option to copy the last Calculator result.
Feedback Assistant 
: While running beta operating systems, this
button appears to help you report problems.
Flashlight 
: Tapping Flashlight turns on the LED flash on iPhones and
iPads that have one, turning your device into a flashlight. Press it to
reveal a slider that lets you adjust the flashlight’s brightness.
Low Power Mode 
 : Turns Low Power Mode on or off. Low Power
Mode turns off or adjusts certain features to maximize battery life, like

--- Page 60 ---
decreasing screen brightness, locking the screen after 30 seconds,
disabling 5G, and turning off background app refresh.
Keyboard Brightness 
 (iPad only): This can adjust the keyboard
brightness on an Apple Magic Keyboard, but no other model.
Print Center 
 : If you have an AirPrint-capable printer that works with
iOS and iPadOS, this button shows the print queue.
Stage Manager 
 : This button appears only on compatible iPads.
Tapping it triggers the Stage Manager feature, which lets you display
multiple windows on screen at once. Touch and hold it to reveal options
to show or hide Recent App and the Dock.
Vision Accessibility
As with the other accessibility categories, Apple has a special Control
Center section for vision:
Classic Invert 
: This feature inverts every color on screen, including
in photos and videos. Consider Smart Invert instead.
Color Filters 
: This feature places a colored filter over your screen.
You can set the color, hue, and intensity of the color filter in Settings >
Accessibility > Display & Text Size > Color Filters.
Dim Flashing Lights 
: When this is enabled, the screen dims
automatically whenever flashing lights are detected on screen.
Hover Text 
 : This feature puts a magnifier on the screen that you can
drag around to see small things better.

--- Page 61 ---
Hover Typing 
 : This feature displays a black box on screen that
shows whatever you are typing. The idea is that you can change the
colors and fonts to make it easier to see what you’re typing, which you
can adjust in Settings > Accessibility > Keyboards & Typing > Hover
Typing.
Increase Contrast 
: Tapping this button makes background colors
lighter and foreground colors darker.
Live Recognition 
: The Live Recognition feature in Measure can
identify doors and other objects and announce them audibly.
Reduce Motion 
: This setting reduces visual effects that simulate
motion.
Reduce Transparency 
: This setting reduces onscreen transparency
effects, replacing them with plain gray.
Reduce White Point 
: This effectively reduces your overall screen
brightness, even more so than the Brightness control, which can make
your device more comfortable in dark rooms.
Smart Invert 
: This inverts all the colors on screen except for photos
and media, so it looks much better than Classic Invert.
Speak Screen 
 : Tapping this button takes you to Settings >
Accessibility > Spoken Content. If you enable Speak Screen there, the
Speak Screen button reads out loud the contents of your screen. A black
box appears with playback controls.
Vehicle Motion Cues 
: Do you get carsick when reading? Vehicle
Motions Cues aims to fix that by placing small dots on the screen

--- Page 62 ---
designed to offset the sensory conflict that causes carsickness. Tap this
button and choose either On or Only in Vehicle.
VoiceOver 
 : This feature speaks out onscreen visual elements and
anything you tap. Tapping this button turns VoiceOver on and off. Be
aware that gestures work differently when VoiceOver is enabled.
Zoom 
: Tapping this button displays on onscreen magnifying glass that
you can move by touching, holding, and dragging its edges.
Voice Memos
Tap the Voice Memos 
 button to start a recording. A box with a stop 
button briefly appears in case you tapped this by accident. To stop the
recording after that, you have to open the Voice Memos app and press stop
. To access the Voice Memos app while recording, tap the time at the
upper-left corner of the iPhone screen or the microphone 
 icon at the
upper-right corner of the iPad screen.
Wallet Controls
Wallet 
  (iPhone only): Tap Wallet to open the Wallet app. Touch and
hold for shortcuts like payment methods and recent transactions.
Tap to Cash (iPhone only) 
: This feature lets you pay a friend with
Apple Cash by touching one iPhone to another. Tap this button to trigger
it.

--- Page 63 ---
Watch
Tap Ping Watch 
  to have your paired Apple Watch make a beacon noise
so you can find it.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 64 ---
Make Sense of the New Photos
Oh boy. Apple has redesigned the Photos app practically from the ground
up, and you’re either going to love it or hate it. Apple seems to going for
two objectives here:
Making the app more customizable, following the theme of iOS 18 and
iPadOS 18.
Eliminating tabs in Photos, at least on iPhones
On iPhones, everything in Photos is now contained in one long continuous
screen. You open the app and see all your photos, then you have to keep
scrolling down to access your albums. It’s very similar on iPads, except the
sidebar is still there to help you quickly jump to an album or collection.
Tip: Photos has long had premade albums based on the type of image, like panoramas and
screenshots. These are greatly expanded in iOS 18 to include things like documents, photos with
handwriting, illustrations, QR codes, and receipts.
To be blunt, I still find this interface confounding, but here I attempt to help
you make sense of it. See Take Control of Photos for full coverage.
Note: If your device supports Apple Intelligence, you can use it to automatically assemble Memory
Movies. See Create Memory Movies with Apple Intelligence.

--- Page 65 ---
View Your Photos
When you first open Photos, everything seems normal. You see your
standard grid of photos, and tabs at the bottom let you switch between
years, months, or all photos. However, this view now has some new tricks:
note the new sort 
 button in the bottom-left corner when you’re viewing
all photos.
Tip: To quickly jump to the bottom of your photos, tap the tab of the view you’re in. So if you’re in
the Months view and have scrolled up, you can tap Months to jump back to the bottom—your most
recent photos.
Here are some tricks for viewing and filtering all photos:
Zoom in and out: Pinch in or out with two fingers to show more or
fewer photos. You can zoom all the way into a single photo (or video).
Filter out screenshots: Tap the sort 
 button, tap View Options, and
then deselect Show Screenshots. Poof, they disappear from view! You
can go back and select Show Screenshots to make them reappear.
View only certain types of images: Tap the sort button, tap Filter, and
select the types of images you want:
All Items
Favorites
Edited (photos and videos you have edited)

--- Page 66 ---
Photos
Videos
Screenshots
You can mix and match these as you like (except for All Items, of
course) to find the specific images you want.
Sort images: Tap the filter button and you can either sort by recently
added or date captured.
Filter shared images: If you share a library with others, you can include
or exclude it from view by tapping the filter button, View Options, and
then selecting or deselecting Show Shared with You. You can also chose
whether or not to show the Shared Library Glyph.
View images in their original aspect ratios: Finally, in View Options,
you can tap Aspect Ratio Grid to view the images in their original aspect
ratio instead of everything being made square.
Is it starting to make sense? Let’s venture forth.
Access Your Albums
Once you scroll past your grid of photos at the top, you enter a section of
photos where Apple semi-randomly displays various albums, collections,
and Memories as if the Photos app were a social media feed.
Here are a few tips for taming the chaos:

--- Page 67 ---
Show all items in a collection: When you scroll down and see
something like Albums, it only shows a random assortment of the
albums. Tap the arrow 
 next to a header to view everything in that
collection.
Pin a collection: There’s a section called Pinned Collections that hovers
somewhere near the top which lets you swipe left and right through
selected collections. Tap Modify and you can add a collection by tapping
the plus 
 button. Tap Any 
 Collection to add any album or collection
to your pinned collections.
Show or hide collections: Scroll to the bottom of Photos and tap
Customize & Reorder. Tap a collection to select it or deselect it. You can
also reorder them by touching, holding, and dragging the grab handle 
.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 68 ---
Do More with Messages
Messages receives incremental changes this year, with more text formatting
options, more-flexible Tapback responses, message scheduling, satellite
messages, and long-awaited support for RCS.
Tip: If you have a device that supports Apple Intelligence, you can also take advantage of Smart
Replies in Messages. See Take Advantage of Smart Replies.
Add Text Effects
You can style any individual letter, word, or emoji in an iMessage, or the
entire message itself. While composing an iMessage in the Messages app,
tap the new text effects 
  icon above the keyboard to reveal a panel
(Figure 22, ahead) of effect options:
Bold 
Italic 
Underline 
Strikethrough 
Big enlarges the text for emphasis.
Small shrinks the text for a subtle impact.
Shake makes the text shake as if saying, “no.”
Nod animates the text to nod in agreement.

--- Page 69 ---
Explode makes the text expand in an arc and explode off the screen.
Ripple creates a ripple effect starting from the first character.
Bloom enlarges and bolds the text one character at a time.
Jitter vibrates the text with nervous energy.
Figure 22: You can apply text effects to only the text you select.
There are two ways to apply these effects:

--- Page 70 ---
Tap an effect to select it before you start typing.
Select the text and then tap the desired effect. To select the text, double
tap to select a word and then drag the blue drag handles to select what
you want (Figure 23).
Figure 23: You can apply text effects to only the text you select.
To remove the effect: select the text and apply the same effect again. To
remove it from a single character, it’s often easier to select the entire word,

--- Page 71 ---
apply an effect, and then tap that effect again to remove it.
Use an Emoji or Sticker Tapback
Tapback responses were introduced with iOS 10 and let you offer quick,
wordless responses to iMessages. It was a neat idea at the time, but the
responses were limited to only: heart, thumbs up, thumbs down, “ha ha,”
exclamation, and question mark.
Most other messaging apps let you respond with any emoji, and now so
does Messages. Touch and hold a received message in Messages to see a
bubble with tapback responses—note that the old designs have been
refreshed. You can swipe from right to left to reveal more options, which
include commonly used emojis (Figure 24).

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 24: You can now use any emoji to quickly respond to messages.
To instead add a custom emoji, swipe left to right all the way to the end, tap
the emoji 
 icon, and choose an emoji from the menu.
You can also tap Add Sticker from the menu to choose any installed sticker
as a Tapback response.

--- Page 73 ---
Send a Message to Be Sent Later
You can now schedule iMessages to send up to two weeks in advance,
which is useful for things like wishing a friend a happy birthday. It doesn’t
mater whether your device is powered on or online when the scheduled
time arrives; it will be sent regardless.
Here’s how to schedule an iMessage:
1. While in a conversation and after composing a message, tap the plus 
button.
2. Choose Send Later from the menu (Figure 25, left).
3. Choose your date and time with the date picker (Figure 25, right).
Figure 25: Choose Send Later from the menu and then select a time with the date
picker.

--- Page 74 ---
4. Tap the send 
 button.
The scheduled message “floats” in the conversation, denoted by a bubble
with a white background and a dashed blue outline. To change the time or
delete the message, tap Edit above the message and then choose either Edit
Time or Delete Message (Figure 26).
Figure 26: The scheduled message “floats” in the conversation until its sent or canceled.
Send Messages via Satellite
The iPhone 14 and later can send messages through a satellite link when
you have no other connectivity. Read that last point again, because sending
a message via satellite isn’t even an option unless you have zero
connectivity: No cellular, no Wi-Fi, and you see SOS in the upper-right
corner. Also, you can only send messages via satellite, not receive them.

--- Page 75 ---
When you try to send a message with no connectivity, a notification appears
with a button that says Use Messages via Satellite (Figure 27).
Figure 27: When you attempt to send a message with no connectivity, you’re prompted to
use Messages via Satellite.
iOS then guides you through connecting to the satellite. Satellite
connections don’t work like cellular or Wi-Fi (Figure 28):
Satellites orbit the planet, and there isn’t always one available. iOS
tracks this and tells you when you have to wait—usually no more than a
minute.
Satellite communications are by line of sight, which means that you have
to point your iPhone toward the satellite and there can’t be obstructions
like buildings or trees.

--- Page 76 ---
Figure 28: iOS 18 guides you through the satellite connection process, which requires line
of sight. However, there isn’t always a satellite available.
Follow the prompts to connect. Once you’re connected, a screen appears
letting you choose whether to send a message, send your location, contact
roadside assistance, or contact emergency services. Tap Messages, and the
Messages app opens. The text field will say “Text Message • Satellite.”
Compose your message as usual, hit the send 
 button, and—if needed—
iOS again guides you through connecting to the satellite.

--- Page 77 ---
Understand RCS Support
Rich Communication Services (RCS) is an industry standard alternative to
iMessage and is intended to replace older SMS and MMS messaging
protocols.
What this effectively means is that texting with Android users should
improve dramatically, with support for read receipts and rich media like
voice messages and high-resolution images.
Even though Apple now supports RCS, your carrier also has to support it.
You can tell by going to Settings > Apps > Messages. If there is an RCS
Messaging switch, then you’re good—be sure to turn on the switch if it’s
not on already.
Another way you can tell: open a conversation with an Android user and
look at the message field. In an SMS message, it will read “Text Message •
SMS.” In an RCS message it will say, “ “Text Message • RCS.”
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 78 ---
Surf Safari’s New Reader
Safari sees only three notable, yet interconnected, changes in iOS 18 and
iPadOS 18:
A new Page 
 Menu for accessing content blockers, extensions, page
search, text size, and other options, along with the new Page Highlights
and Reader features
Page Highlights, which uses artificial intelligence to summarize page
content, offer audio versions of web articles, and other features
A redesigned Reader that is part of Page Highlights and accessible from
the new page menu
Explore the Page Menu
Tap the Page Menu 
 icon to:
Listen to an AI-generated audio reading of the page or show the Reader
Turn off content blockers (in case they present a problem viewing the
page)
Access settings for installed Safari extensions
Search 
 the current page
Decrease 
 or increase 
 the page’s text size

--- Page 79 ---
While viewing the Page Menu, tap the more 
 button at the bottom to see
additional actions:
Page Actions: Things like the Privacy Report, requesting the desktop
version of a site, and printing the page
Tab Actions: Favorite a site, add a bookmark, and so on
Website Settings: Set specific settings for that website that apply
whenever you view a page from that site:
Request the desktop version
Automatically use Reader
Use (or don’t use) content blockers
Open links in a specific profile
Set permissions for the camera, microphone, and location
Additionally, you can add shortcuts to anything on this screen to the
Page Menu:
1. Tap Edit.
2. Tap the add 
 button by an entry to add it to the Page Menu.
3. Tap the remove 
 button to remove it from the Page Menu.
Peruse the Redesigned Reader
The Reader has been redesigned to accommodate new Apple Intelligence
features. To access it, touch and hold the Page Menu 
 icon while reading
an article.

--- Page 80 ---
While in Reader, tap the Page Menu 
 icon (which temporarily replaces the
Page Menu 
 icon) to see options to change the font and color scheme
(Figure 29).
Figure 29: Reader lets you adjust the style or listen to an audio version of the article.
To leave Reader, tap the Reader 
 icon.
While viewing Reader, you can usually tap Summarize at the top to see an
Apple Intelligence-generated summary of the page (Figure 30).

--- Page 81 ---
Figure 30: Reader can now summarize articles.
Another new option in Reader is Listen to Page, which reads the article out
loud. To access playback controls, tap the Page Menu 
 icon to reveal
pause 
, go back 
, and go forward 
 icons. You can also use the typical
media controls on the Lock Screen and in Control Center.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 82 ---
Try the Passwords App
Apple has slowly been building up their password-management capabilities
for years. With this round of operating system updates, Passwords is
breaking out of the Settings app and moving to an app of its own for iOS,
iPadOS, and macOS.
Passwords supports sharing password groups with friends and family,
generating new passwords, storing two-factor authentication (2FA) codes,
and managing passkeys.
Explore the Passwords Home Screen
The main difference between the Passwords app and the old settings menu
is that it opens to a nice home screen with a search bar, entry categories, and
access to shared password groups. Here’s what each category contains:
All: Tap this to see all of your password entries. On the All screen, tap
the Sort 
 icon to reveal a menu of sorting options.
Passkeys: This screen shows all your passkeys. A passkey is a secure
token that takes the place of a password. Instead of typing a password,
you authenticate with Face ID or Touch ID, which is easier and more
secure.
Many websites now offer passkey login options, usually in addition to a
password, though every site handles this differently. Often, you are

--- Page 83 ---
prompted to create a passkey when you log in, and it’s securely stored in
Passwords.
Codes: Many sites now encourage or require two-factor authentication
(2FA), which usually equates to a constantly changing code that you
have to enter alongside a password. The Codes screen shows all these
codes, and you can tap the add 
 icon to create a new one from a
provided code or by scanning a QR code.
Wi-Fi: This stores the passwords of Wi-Fi networks you have connected
to in Settings > Wi-Fi.
Security: The Security screen lists passwords that should be changed,
either because they’re weak or reused or have been compromised. Tap a
password to see the recommendation, which usually provides a Change
Password button to send you to the page to reset that site’s password
(Figure 31).

--- Page 84 ---
Figure 31: Passwords can alert you about compromised passwords you should change.
Deleted: This screen shows any passwords you have deleted, which are
retained for 30 days before vanishing forever. To rescue a password on
the Recently Deleted screen, tap it and then tap Recover.
Add or Edit a Password
Usually, iOS and iPadOS guides you through creating and storing a
password when creating a new login in Safari. But you often need to return
to edit that password to change it, add a note, or add a 2FA code. It’s also
good to know how to create a password entry from scratch:
1. Tap All.
2. Tap the add 
 icon to add a new password, or tap an existing password
to edit it and then tap Edit.

--- Page 85 ---
Either way, the fields are the same:
Website, App, or Label: This is just the name of the password. It can be
whatever you want but should be descriptive so you can find it.
User Name: The name you use to log in, usually an email address.
Password: If the field is blank, Passwords will automatically generate a
secure password. You can delete it and add your own.
Group: If you have shared groups set up, you can assign one here to
share it with other people.
Notes: Any secure notes you would like to add. This is a good place to
add recovery keys, and security questions with answers.
Annoyingly, there are certain fields you can’t access while creating a new
password, so you have to return and edit it:
Set Up Verification Code: Tap this if you’re setting up 2FA for a login.
Typically you do this on the site’s security settings page, and the site
provides a code (which you can enter by typing into the Setup Key field
and tapping Use Setup Key,) or it displays a QR code (which you can
scan by tapping Scan QR Code with Camera).
Tip: To copy the 2FA code, open the password entry, tap Verification Code, and then tap Copy
Verification Code in the popover.

--- Page 86 ---
Change Password: This button doesn’t change your password in the
app. Instead, it takes you to the website to change your password there,
which should be picked up by Safari, which prompts you to update your
password.
Tip: You can change the saved password for an entry by tapping into the password’s field.
Website: This is the URL or URLs where you want to be prompted to
autofill this password. Two tips I can offer here:
You can keep tapping Add Website to add additional associated URLs
for that password. This is especially handy for Microsoft properties,
because they love having multiple domains that use the same login
information, like microsoft.com, live.com, xbox.com,
and linkedin.com.
Make the URLs as plain as possible. So instead of entering the URL
as outlook.live.com, which will only work on the Microsoft
Outlook site, set the URL to live.com, which will work with all
live.com subdomains.
Share Passwords with Others
You can share any password or passkey over AirDrop by opening it and
then tapping the share 
 icon. However, it’s much better to set up a group
for sharing passwords to keep them in sync.

--- Page 87 ---
Note: To add someone to a group, they must have a device running iOS 17, iPadOS 17, macOS
Sonoma, or later, and they must be in your contacts.
To create a new password group:
1. On the main screen of Passwords, tap the New Group 
 icon.
2. Enter a group name on the New Shared Group screen.
3. Tap Add People to add others to the group. Enter a name from your
contacts, tap their entry, and then tap Add.
4. Back on the New Shared Group screen, tap Create.
5. You’re notified if you have any incompatible devices. Tap Continue.
6. You’re presented with a list of your passwords. Tap the ones you want to
move to the new group and tap Move to finish.
Here are common actions for shared password groups:
Change a password’s group: While viewing a password, tap Edit and
then Group as described above.
Add a member to a group: From the main Passwords screen, tap the
group, tap X Members, and then tap Add People.
Remove a member from a group: From the main Passwords screen, tap
the group, tap X Members, tap the person to remove, and then tap
Remove From Group.
Delete a group: From Password’s main screen, tap the group, tap X
Members, and then tap Delete Group. After the group is deleted, the

--- Page 88 ---
passwords you shared return to your private collection and you lose
access to the passwords others shared with you.
Autofill Passwords
Your device can manage passwords for websites and apps, or help you fill
in passwords from your favorite password manager—either Apple’s
Passwords or another, like 1Password.
To set up password autofill to use a third-party app, go to Settings >
General > AutoFill & Passkeys and enable the apps you’d like to access
passwords from, such as 1Password, Proton Pass, or Passwords.
When you log in to a website or app, if iOS or iPadOS recognizes that you
have an associated login, it prompts you to use that login and you’ll have to
verify with Face ID or Touch ID. Different login options appear in the
QuickType bar above the keyboard. You can tap the key 
 icon to see all
available logins.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 89 ---
Take Notes Further
Dedicated Notes users may notice a small change right away: the camera 
icon in the toolbar has been replaced with a paperclip 
 icon, which reflects
new features in notes: the capability to record audio and attach files directly
to a note. There are some other goodies to explore as well…
Record Audio in Notes
You can now directly record voice memos inside a note. Here’s how:
1. Tap the paperclip 
 icon.
2. Choose Record Audio from the menu.
3. Tap the red record 
 button to start recording.
4. You can tap the pause 
 button to temporarily stop recording. Tap
Resume to continue.
5. While recording, you can tap the transcript 
 button to view a live
transcript of your recording.
6. To name a recording, tap the more 
 button, choose Rename, and type in
a new name. Tap outside the text field to set the name.
7. When you’re finished with the recording, tap Done.
To play back a recording inside a note, tap Play on the note. Controls appear
for pause 
, 15 seconds back 
, and 15 seconds forward 
.

--- Page 90 ---
Attach Files to Notes
It’s now easy to attach images and files from your device’s storage and
iCloud Drive:
1. Tap the paperclip 
 icon.
2. Choose Attach File from the menu.
3. Browse for the file you want to attach.
4. Tap the file to insert it into the note.
Some file types work better than others. Images and PDFs neatly embed
into a note, but other file types, such as EPUB, may prompt you to open
them in a more appropriate app, like Books.
Use Math Notes in Notes
If you’re like me and use Notes for everything, you might find yourself
using it to write down financial information like bill amounts or taxes due
instead of using a spreadsheet or calculator.
Thankfully, Apple has recognized us and our plight with a new feature
called Math Notes, which lets you perform calculations inside a note, either
by typing them out or even writing them freehand.
Let’s examine some examples of what you can do with Math Notes.

--- Page 91 ---
Typing Math Notes
Let’s start with some very simple examples. Try typing something like this
in a note: 4x4=. After the equals sign (=), Notes autofills the answer in
yellow (Figure 32). Tap Return on the keyboard to insert the answer into
the note. If you tap outside the calculation, it will lose the result, so be sure
to tap Return to insert it.

--- Page 92 ---
Figure 32: Notes can do basic arithmetic, unit conversions, and even simple equations.
You can also insert the answer from the QuickType bar above the keyboard.
It also usually offers some other options, like reformatting the equation. For

--- Page 93 ---
instance, it can transform 2/3+4/5= into 2÷3+4÷5=.
Note: This calculation feature works systemwide. For example, if you type a formula like 2+3=
into a message, QuickType suggests 2+3=5.
You can do conversions as well. Try typing something like 4
tablespoons in cups = and it will autofill 0.25 cups.
Math Notes also understands variables. You can type:
a=5
b=2
And then type a+b= to autofill 7.
Play around and see what else Math Notes can do!
Writing Math Notes
You can write out and solve equations by hand as well. This works on both
iPhone and iPad, but works best with an iPad paired with an Apple Pencil.
Tap the markup button, choose any drawing tool, and then draw out your
equation, making sure to draw an equals sign at the end. Wait a second and
then a popover appears with the detected equation and “Solve.” (Figure 33)

--- Page 94 ---
Tap the popover and the answer is autofilled in a simulation of your own
handwriting!
Figure 33: Notes can even solve handwritten math problems.
Add Collapsible Sections
It’s long been a best practice in long notes to divide your note into headings
and subheadings. Now it’s an even better practice, because you can
“collapse” the contents under a heading or subheading, which temporarily
hides the contents. This makes it much easier to handle very long notes.
As a reminder, to create headings: tap the format 
 icon and choose Title,
Heading, or Subheading. Those formats are applied to whatever line your
insertion point is in, regardless of what text is selected.
Once you have headings in place, tap on a heading to reveal the collapse
arrow and then tap the arrow to collapse 
 or expand 
 a section (Figure

--- Page 95 ---
34).
Figure 34: On the left, the Subheading is collapsed. On the right, it’s expanded.
Here are the rules for how it works:
When a heading is collapsed, it folds in all content between that heading
and the next, including subheadings.
When a subheading is collapsed, it folds in all content up to the next
heading or subheading.
Highlight Text
Highlight is a new formatting option that colors text and its background to
draw attention to it. To try it, select existing text, or, before you start typing

--- Page 96 ---
text:
1. Tap the format 
 icon in the toolbar to reveal the formatting panel.
2. Note the new highlight 
 button in the panel and the color button next to
it.
3. Tap the color button and choose a color from the menu. Note that when
you choose a color, it turns highlighting on automatically.
To remove highlighting, select the highlighted text and then tap the
highlight 
 button again.
Try Smart Script
Smart Script automatically corrects your handwriting to make it more
legible. First, be sure your iPad supports it—see Check Your iPad for
Compatibility. It’s easy to try:
1. Open a note.
2. Tap the Markup 
 button.
3. Tap the more 
 button on the Markup palette.
4. Enable Auto-refine Handwriting.
5. Now write something with your finger or Apple Pencil and watch your
iPad automatically clean up your handwriting.

--- Page 97 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 98 ---
Hike with Maps
Apple is heavily emphasizing the new hiking features in Maps: topographic
maps for hiking trails in the United States and Japan, along with custom
hiking trails. However, most of us will better appreciate the small features
that have flown under the radar. Apple has consolidated saved locations into
a new feature called the Library, and it has finally made it easy to search
near a location far away from you.
Understand the Library
Previously, Maps had a Favorites section that stored places you had saved.
Then Apple added custom city guides, which made things a little messy.
Now Apple has combined those two features into a new yet familiar one
called Library that saves all of your saved places, guides, trails, and pinned
locations.
To visit the Library, swipe up on the search panel to reveal the Library
section. To see everything in your Library, tap where it says “X Places • X
Guides • X Routes.”
To add a location to a map, after looking it up in Maps, tap the add 
button
on its navigation panel, which turns into a checkmark 
. After adding a
location, an Add a Note option appears in the navigation panel. Tap it to add

--- Page 99 ---
a short note about the place, which is displayed underneath its listing in the
Library (Figure 35).
Figure 35: Notes you add to saved places appear in the Library. It’s a helpful reminder to
yourself of why you added it!
Search Here
Here’s an annoyance with Maps: you zoom in on a place you’re traveling to
and try to search for something nearby, like a restaurant, only for it to show
results near your current location. Thankfully, iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 fix
this.
Try searching for something nearby, like “sushi.” As you scroll around the
map, results for your search pop up around the location you’re currently
viewing. A “Search here button” might also appear—tapping it gives more
thorough search results in the area you’re viewing (Figure 36). Likewise, if
you “travel” to a distant location in Maps and search for a term, like
“pizza,” it will show pizza joints near the place you are viewing in Maps.

--- Page 100 ---
Figure 36: A “Search here” button often appears in a remote location to help you further
refine your search.
Explore Topographic Maps and Trail Networks
Maps now features known hiking trails, and you can also customize your
own trails. They’re available all over Japan and the United States, including
all 63 U.S. national parks.
Tip: Search for “trails” and tap the Trails suggestion to discover nearby hiking trails.
On the map, you want to look for four green icons:
National Parks 
: Tap a national park to see listings for available hikes
in that park (Figure 37). Tap More to see a full list of available hikes.

--- Page 101 ---
Figure 37: National park listings contain popular hiking trails.
Numbers 
: Indicates multiple trails. Zoom in to see them individually.
Trails 
: These represent predefined trails. Tap a trail to view its route
on the map (Figure 38).

--- Page 102 ---
Figure 38: Trails are predefined paths you can follow.
Tap a hike to see it outlined on the map, along with information about:
Distance
Elevation, including variation
The estimated time to complete

--- Page 103 ---
Trailheads 
: These indicate jumping-off points for hikes. Tap a
trailhead to view a list of predefined trails near the trailhead or to create
a custom route.
Tip: Tap Download while viewing a location to download the map for offline use.
Create Custom Walking and Hiking Routes
To plan a custom route, you need to find a trailhead, identified on the map
with a green icon with a sign 
 on it. You can also search Maps for
“trailhead” to find some. Tap that green 
 icon and then tap Create a
Custom Route in the navigation panel.
Maps display a map with the started point centered, and a Create a Custom
Route panel at the bottom. Gray and white lines indicate possible hiking
and walking paths. Tap somewhere along that path to add a waypoint. you
can keep tapping to add multiple waypoints along a route.
As you add points to the trail, the navigation panel changes to reflect
distance, time, and elevation changes (Figure 39).

--- Page 104 ---
Figure 39: Creating a custom path in Maps.
Tip: If you add a point by mistake, tap the undo 
 button. You can also tap a point and choose
Remove Point from the menu.
There are three options to complete a trail: Reverse, Out & Back, and Close
Loop. In my testing, Reverse (which swaps start and end points) and Out &

--- Page 105 ---
Back (which has you turn around at the end point and return to the start) are
sometimes the only options available, with Close Loop available only when
you specify points along a path that can be made into a loop.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 106 ---
Power Up Calculator
The Calculator app gets a love of love in iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 (yes, it’s
now on the iPad!) with a new Math Notes feature, a conversion calculator, a
dedicated delete 
 key, and calculator history.
Tip: To switch among calculator types, tap the calculator 
 key to reveal a menu. This is how you
now switch to the Scientific calculator on your iPhone, instead of rotating into landscape orientation.
Convert with Calculator
The Calculator app now has a built-in conversion function. To access it, tap
the calculator 
 key, choose either Basic or Scientific, and then turn on
Convert.
When in Convert mode, Calculator shows two numbers in the display
(Figure 40, left). Just pick one and then tap the unit designation, denoted by
double 
 arrows. This reveals a vast menu of conversion units separated by
category, such as currency, data, energy, fuel, force, temperature, time,
volume, and weight. You can also search conversion units, which is good
because the menu is overwhelming (Figure 40, center and right).

--- Page 107 ---
Figure 40: Left: The conversion calculator in action. Middle and right: Examples of the
many units supported.
Once you select a conversion unit in one result field, repeat the same steps
for the other field. Be sure to choose a unit in the same category, otherwise
the category for the other field will change (you can’t convert bytes to
kilograms, come on now).
Once your units are set, tap the number in one result field to see the
conversion in the other field.
Finally, you can perform calculations in either field. For example, let’s say
you’re converting 30 days into minutes, but then want to see how many
minutes are in 31 days. You can tap the 30, tap +, and then tap 1 to
transform that into 31 and then see the result in minutes as well.

--- Page 108 ---
Use Math Notes in Calculator
I won’t cover Math Notes here in depth because it works the same as in the
Notes app—see Use Math Notes in Notes. However, I want to touch on
how Math Notes in Calculator interacts with the Notes app.
Note: Notes you create in the Calculator appear in the Notes app, but not vice versa.
To create a Math Note in Calculator, tap the calculator 
 key and choose
Math Notes from the menu, which reveals a list of math notes (which will
be empty the first time you use it). Tap the new note 
 icon to create a new
math note. Or, tap an existing math note to edit it.
Again, the notes you create in the Calculator app appear in the Notes app
and you can then edit those notes in Notes. However, your formatting
options in Calculator are limited to just titles, regular text, and drawing. If
you apply a different style in Notes, you see it in Calculator, but can’t
change it.
View Calculator History
Finally, you can view your calculation history, which is handy for looking
up previous results, which you can then alter or copy to paste elsewhere.

--- Page 109 ---
Note: Calculator history only displays completed calculations completed with the equals (=) key.
To view history on an iPhone, tap the menu 
 icon. On an iPad, tap the
sidebar icon. Tap a calculation to return to it. You can also touch and hold a
calculation to reveal a menu that lets you copy either the expression
(equation) or the result.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 110 ---
Journal with Journal
The Journal app was introduced with iOS 17.2, but even with its late
arrival, some key features were missing—like search! While there still isn’t
an iPad app, the Journal app gets some essential updates in iOS 17.
Sort and Search Journal Entries
Tapping the search 
 button reveals a Search field where you can search by
title or content of a journal entry. Additionally, you can filter your journal
entries by:
Bookmarked: This only shows journal entries that have been
bookmarked.
Photos: Tap this to see only entries with photos.
Places: This option shows only entries with map locations.
Text Only: This filters out everything that has an attachment.
Add Journal Widgets to the Home Screen
The Journal app now has widgets for the Lock Screen and Home Screen for
both writing prompts and quick access to the Journal app (Figure 41).

--- Page 111 ---
Figure 41: Journal offers Lock Screen and Home Screen widgets for quick entries.
To add a widget to the Home Screen:
1. Touch and hold an empty spot on the Home Screen until you enter
“jiggle mode.”
2. Tap Edit in the upper-left corner.
3. Tap Add Widget.
4. Scroll down and tap Journal.
5. Swipe left to view the different widget options.
6. Tap Add Widget to add a widget to the Home Screen.
To add a widget to the Lock Screen:
1. Touch and hold an empty spot on the Lock Screen until it “shrinks in.”
2. Tap Customize.
3. Tap Lock Screen.

--- Page 112 ---
4. Tap the widget area under the time.
5. In the Add Widgets panel, scroll down and tap Journal.
6. Swipe left and right to cycle through the available widgets. Tap one to
add it to the Lock Screen.
View Journal Stats
The Journal app now shows three stats at the top of the screen (Figure 42):
The number of entries you’ve recorded so far this year.
The number of words you’ve written in the current year.
How many days you’ve journaled this year.
Figure 42: Journal tracks your entries, words written, and days journaled.
You can tap any of these to see an Insights panel that shows your streaks
(number of days in a row you’ve journaled), various stats, and a calendar of
your journal entries. You can tap any date on the calendar that has a dot.

--- Page 113 ---
Journal for Wellbeing
Apple has added wellness-oriented features to Journal. While recording a
journal entry, you can tap the state of mind 
 icon to record your current
mood (Figure 43). Then:
1. Slide the slider toward Very Unpleasant or Very Pleasant depending on
your mood.
2. Tap Next.
3. Tap the feelings that best describe your mood. Tap Show More to reveal
more feelings.
4. Tap the things having the biggest impact on your mood.
5. Tap Done.

--- Page 114 ---
Figure 43: Journal lets you log your mental well-being.
You also can set it so you can record your time spent journaling as wellness
minutes in the Health app, along with your state of mind: Go to Settings >
Apps > Health > Data Access & Devices > Journal and turn on Mindful
Minutes and State of Mind.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 115 ---
Discover Other App Changes
Many apps see important changes in iOS 18 and iPadOS 18, but not enough
changes to warrant an entire chapter dedicated to them. This chapter covers
those miscellaneous changes.
Calendar
Calendar for iOS has a redesigned month view that displays the agenda for
the selected day at the bottom of the screen so you can view the entire
month and an individual day at the same time. The new month view also
shows your scheduled reminders for that day (Figure 44).

--- Page 116 ---
Figure 44: The old month view (left) vs. the new month view (right).
You can now also create reminders directly from the Calendar app by
tapping the add 
 icon and then the Reminders tab.
Files
You can now erase an external disk using the Files app, including choosing
the file system format:
1. With a storage device attached, touch and hold it in Files.
2. Choose Erase from the menu.
3. Enter a name, tap a format, and tap Erase.

--- Page 117 ---
You can choose from these formats:
1. APFS: This is the best format, assuming you’ll only use this device
with Apple products. You can also choose to encrypt the volume with
a password.
2. ExFAT: Pick this if you need interoperability with Windows PCs.
3. MS-DOS (FAT): This is the oldest but most compatible option.
However, it has a lot of limitations: no files over 4 GB, partitions
can’t be larger than 32 GB, and spaces are not allowed in filenames.
Fitness+
The Fitness+ app see many changes and new features on iPhones.
Explore the New Fitness+ Tab
The Fitness+ tab in the Fitness app has been redesigned. There are now tabs
at the top: For You, Explore, Library, and Search 
. For You presents
personalized workouts, and the option to search workouts is new. Apple
Fitness+ requires a paid subscription.
Edit the Summary Screen
You can now edit the Summary screen to add and remove elements as you
see fit (except for Activity Rings):
1. Open Fitness to the Summary screen.

--- Page 118 ---
2. Scroll down and tap Add Summary.
3. The Summary screen enters “jiggle mode.” Here you can:
1. Touch, hold, and drag around elements to rearrange them.
2. Tap the delete 
 button on an element to remove it.
3. Tap Add to see a menu of things you can add to the Summary,
including data from third-party fitness apps.
4. Tap Done when finished.
Customize Activity Rings
You can now adjust goals and even pause your Activity Rings for a time.
Open Fitness and tap Activity Rings on the Summary screen.
You can tap Change Goals to change your daily Move goal. On that screen,
you can tap Schedule in the upper-right corner to set individual goals for
each day of the week.
Also, on the Activity Rings screen, you can tap Pause Rings for the day, the
rest of the week, or the rest of the month, or set a custom time.
View Training Load
Training Load is a new Fitness metric that tallies up the intensity of your
daily workouts. You can view it by tapping See All Categories > Training
Load on the Summary screen.

--- Page 119 ---
Freeform
You can now make scenes in Freeform. Think of a scene like a bookmark
that lets you instantly zip back to a certain spot and zoom level on the
board. This is especially handy for large boards with distinct sections.
To make a scene on an iPhone:
1. Open a Freeform board.
2. Scroll and zoom in on the area you want to capture as a scene.
3. On an iPhone, tap the more 
 button and choose Add Scene from the
menu. On an iPad, tap the Scene button in the lower-left corner of the
screen, tap the menu 
 icon, and tap Add Scene.
After adding a scene, the Scene Navigator appears on the screen. Tap the
arrows 
 
  to navigate between scenes or tap the menu 
 icon to reveal a
menu of scenes. To hide or show the Scene Navigator on an iPhone, tap the
more 
 button and select Scene Navigator.
Tip: You can now invite others to Freeform boards with just a link. Tap the share 
 icon, scroll the
app icons from right to left and tap Invite with Link. Enter a contact name, phone number, or email
address and tap Share Link.

--- Page 120 ---
Home
Home has several planned improvements in iOS 18 and iPadOS 18.
Unfortunately, most have yet to materialize because they either have yet to
be implemented or third-party support:
Hands-free unlock: You’ll be able to unlock a HomeKit lock just by
walking near it. Unfortunately, it won’t support any existing locks, as it
requires an ultra wide-band chip in the lock. Be on the lookout for those
to hit the market.
Guest access: You’ll be able to allow guests access to control select
accessories in your home without giving them permanent access, you
can revoke the access easily, and they cannot control your home
accessories while away from your home. It’s not implemented as of the
iOS 18.1 developer beta.
Robot vacuum cleaners: HomeKit will support robot vacuum cleaners.
Track energy usage: Customers of the Pacific Gas and Electric
Company in California can connect the Home app to their account to
track energy usage over time. Here’s how to set it up:
1. From the Home Screen, tap the More 
 button.
2. Tap Home Settings from the menu.
3. Tap Energy.
4. Tap Connect Account.
5. Follow the prompts to set up your PG&E account.

--- Page 121 ---
Mail
So far, Mail doesn’t see many changes unless your device can take
advantage of Apple Intelligence, which grants powerful new writing and
message summary tools. See Meet Apple Intelligence.
Music
The song queueing system in the Music app has been made more obvious.
It’s been renamed from Playing Next to Queue. When you touch and hold a
song, instead of tapping Play Last to add it to the queue, you now tap the
Add to Queue option. The new queue screen (accessed by tapping the queue
 icon) has larger buttons for shuffle 
 , repeat 
, and autoplay 
, as
well as a new Clear text label to clear the queue. And there’s now an Add
Songs to Queue button at the end of the list (Figure 45).

--- Page 122 ---
Figure 45: The iOS 17 Now Playing screen (left) vs. the iOS 18 Queue screen (right).
Phone
The dialer in the Phone app has a couple of upgrades to make it smarter:
Search in Recents: There is now a Search field on top of the Recents
tab, where you can search through recent calls by date, keyword, name,
or phone number.
Search with the keypad: On the Keypad tab, you can now tap the digits
to spell out contact names based on the letters on each key. For example,
you can type 563 to type out “joe.” The top result appears at the top,

--- Page 123 ---
which you can tap to call. More results underneath, and you can tap to
see the full list.
TV
There are a couple of neat features in the TV app that are exclusive to Apple
TV+ subscription content:
Enhance Dialogue: Having trouble understanding what people are
saying? Tap the screen, tap the audio 
 button, and choose either Boost
or Enhance Dialogue from the menu. I’ve listened to both and can’t tell
the difference, but both make the dialogue clearer, so try them both and
see which one you prefer.
Insight: While watching an Apple TV+ show, tap the screen to reveal
controls and tap the Insight button at the bottom. If it’s available for a
scene, it displays the actors in the scene and their character names. It’s
very similar to Amazon’s X-Ray feature.
Wallet
The marquee new feature in Wallet is Tap to Cash, which lets you send
Apple Cash from one iPhone to another by holding them together, much as
you can initiate an AirDrop exchange.
Here’s how to initiate Tap to Cash:

--- Page 124 ---
1. Open Wallet.
2. Tap your Apple Cash card (available only in the United States).
3. Tap the Send or Request button.
4. Tap Tap to Cash.
5. Enter an amount on the number pad.
6. Tap Next.
7. Confirm the transaction with the Side or Home button.
8. Hold the top of your iPhone near the top of another iPhone or Apple
Watch.
Note: Tap to Cash requires both devices to be running iOS 18 or watchOS 11 or later.
Apple has announced other Wallet features that will roll out over time:
Apple Pay in any desktop browser: With macOS Sonoma, you can
now use Apple Pay in any desktop web browser and not just Safari. The
checkout screen will display a unique round QR code you can scan with
your iPhone’s camera to complete the payment.
Credit card rewards and installment payments: Credit card issuers
will be able to let you cash in point rewards in Wallet. Reward
redemptions will first be offered by Discover and Synchrony, with other
Apple Pay-compatible cards being supported by Fiserv.
Installment plans: Apple has shut down Apple Pay Later. Instead, U.S.
users will be able to set up installment payments in Wallet through

--- Page 125 ---
Affirm. Other countries will be supported bank by bank (Figure 46,
left).
Redesigned event tickets: Wallet event tickets can offer features like
custom art, venue maps, and event guides (Figure 46, right).
Figure 46: Left: You can make purchases in installments. Right: Redesigned event
tickets with event and venue information. Image credit: Apple.

--- Page 126 ---
Tap to add new cards: You’ll be able to set up some credit cards in
Wallet by tapping them against your iPhone.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 127 ---
Discover Other System Changes
Here are other, smaller changes in iOS 18 and iPadOS 18.
Accessibility
Apple has always placed an emphasis on making iPhones and iPads
accessible to everyone, and iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 add some next-
generation features you can appreciate even if you don’t need them right
now. Make sure your device supports these features first—see Check Your
iPhone for Compatibility.
Control Your Device with Your Eyes
One of the coolest new features is Eye Tracking, which lets you control
your iPhone or iPad with your eyes. How does that work? Basically, your
iPhone or iPad shows a small round gray pointer on screen—just like the
mouse pointer on an iPad—that snaps to tappable elements.
If you’ve used a mouse or trackpad with an iPad, it works pretty much the
same. Frankly, I’m terrible at it, but I can at least show you how to set it up
and give some tips.
Before you set it up, there are a couple of things to be aware of:

--- Page 128 ---
It only works well if the device is on a flat, steady surface and you’re
about one foot away. Otherwise, the pointer wanders all over the place.
Eye Tracking only moves the pointer around the screen, and it depends
on other features for interaction, such as:
AssistiveTouch, which places a small button on the screen that opens
to a menu of system shortcuts. Set this up in Settings > Accessibility
> Touch > AssistiveTouch.
Dwell Control, which lets you trigger onscreen elements by staring at
them instead of tapping them. It can be configured in Settings >
Accessibility > Touch > AssistiveTouch.
The new Vocal Shortcuts feature described above.
To set up Eye Tracking:
1. Go to Settings > Accessibility > Eye Tracking.
2. Before enabling Eye Tracking, get ready. Place your device on a flat
surface and get ready to spend a minute calibrating it.
3. When you enable Eye Tracking, the screen blacks out and a colored dot
appears at various places around the screen. Stare at each dot as it
appears.
Once calibration is complete, Eye Tracking is enabled and you can move
the pointer around with your eyes. It also automatically enables
AssistiveTouch and Dwell Control, so you can “tap” an item by continuing
to stare at it.

--- Page 129 ---
Try Music Haptics
Music Haptics makes your iPhone pulse and vibrate along with the music.
Try it out by going to Accessibility > Music Haptics and enabling Music
Haptics. You can tap Play Sample to get an idea of what it’s like, or just
play a song in the Music app.
Try Vocal Shortcuts
Vocal Shortcuts is a new feature that lets you utter short phrases to perform
actions, such as triggering a shortcut, returning to the Home Screen, or
taking a screenshot. It pairs well with the new Eye Tracking feature because
it can also do things like scroll up and down, which are difficult to perform
with Eye Tracking.
To set it up:
1. Go to Settings > Accessibility > Vocal Shortcuts
2. Tap Set Up Vocal Shortcuts.
3. Tap Continue.
4. Choose an action from the very long list. Scroll Down and Scroll Up are
good pairings for Eye Tracking.
5. Enter a name for the custom phrase. For the sake of simplicity, I would
start with the name of the action, like “Scroll Down.”
6. Tap Go on the keyboard.
7. Say the phrase three times when prompted.

--- Page 130 ---
8. Either tap Continue to finish or tap Add Another to add another action.
After the shortcut is set up, using it is as simple as saying the command you
taught it.
Tip: To delete a Vocal Shortcut, return to Settings > Accessibility > Vocal Shortcuts, tap Edit, and
then the delete 
 button next to the shortcut you want to delete. You can also tap Add Action on that
screen to add another shortcut.
AirPods
One change to note right away: your AirPod settings are no longer located
in Settings > Bluetooth. Instead, they are available near the top of the
Settings app, listed under whatever you have named them.
Tip: If your AirPods don’t appear in settings, move the case close to your device and open the lid.
Before you can use the new AirPods features of iOS 18, iPadOS 18, and
macOS Sequoia, your AirPods must first update to the appropriate firmware
version. This happens automatically while the case is charging with the
AirPods inside.
You can check your firmware version in Settings > AirPods Name. Scroll to
the bottom and tap Version to see the firmware version of both the AirPods

--- Page 131 ---
and the case.
Here are how to use the new features:
Adjust Adaptive Audio: iOS 17 introduced Adaptive Audio for AirPods
Pro (2nd generation), which blends Noise Cancellation and
Transparency. You can now adjust it to prefer one mode or the other. Go
to Settings > AirPods Name > Customize Adaptive Audio and move the
slider between less noise and more noise.
Nod for yes, shake for no: iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 take advantage of the
motion sensors in AirPods Pro (2nd generation) to let you silently accept
or decline calls and other notifications. For instance, if Siri informs you
of an incoming call, you can nod your head to accept it or shake your
head to decline it.
To enable this feature, go to Settings > AirPods Name > Head Gestures
and enable Head Gestures. While here, you can also swap the direction
of the functions if you want, so shaking answers a call and nodding
declines it.
Spatial Audio in games: Games that support Game Mode can now
provide Spatial Audio to AirPods (3rd generation), AirPods Pro, and
AirPods Max. Spatial Audio simulates a surround-sound system, making
it so that sound appears to come from multiple directions around you.
Game Mode also reduces latency for more responsive audio.
Voice Isolation: Apple’s algorithm is now better at reducing background
microphone noise in Voice Isolation mode. The way to enable Voice

--- Page 132 ---
Isolation during a call has changed:
1. Open Control Center during a call.
2. Tap App Name Controls at the top of Control Center.
3. Tap Voice Isolation.
Apple ID Is Now Apple Account
Apple appears to be moving away from the term Apple ID to refer to your
online account with Apple, instead opting for the more-descriptive Apple
Account. You can see this language most prominently in Settings > Your
Name.
Game Mode
Apple has implemented a new Game Mode that kicks on automatically for
games that support it, letting you know with a notification. Game Mode
reduces background activity to give as many resources as possible to the
game, making audio and game controllers more responsive. It also allows
for Spatial Audio in games that support it.
Contact Sharing
A lot of apps want access to your contacts list, whether they need it or not.
But some apps actually do need access to your contacts, just not all of them.
So now you can select exactly which contacts you want an app to access:

--- Page 133 ---
1. Go to Settings > Privacy & Security > Contacts > App Name.
2. Choose Limited Access.
3. A screen appears that says No Contacts. Tap Edit to add some.
4. Tap Contacts to include. A checkmark 
 appears next to selected
contacts.
5. Tap Done when finished.
Emergency SOS Live Video
Apple says you can now share live and recorded video with first responders
during emergency calls. Sorry, we’re not testing this—we’ll take their word
for it!
Flashlight
If you own an iPhone with a Dynamic Island, the new flashlight control
might be the coolest feature iOS 18 has to offer. When you turn on the
flashlight, a window appears at the top of the screen with a large flashlight
icon that you can touch, hold, and drag to adjust the beam. Slide your finger
up and down to adjust the brightness and side to side to change the focus of
the beam (Figure 47).

--- Page 134 ---
Figure 47: Slide your finger around the flashlight’s Dynamic Island window to change the
output.
Tap outside the window to dismiss it. To bring it back, tap the flashlight 
icon in the Dynamic Island while the flashlight is on.
iPad
Apps compiled for iPadOS 18 have a redesigned sidebar and tab bar. You
can experience it in the Music, News, Podcasts, and TV apps, and certainly
more to come soon.
Note: The tab bar tends to appear only in portrait orientation.
The tab bar and sidebar are designed to be two halves of the same whole.
You can tap the toggle sidebar 
 icon while the tab bar is showing to

--- Page 135 ---
transform the tab bar to the sidebar. Likewise, you can tap the hide sidebar
 icon while the sidebar is showing to transform the sidebar into the tab
bar.
Note: The tab bar portion doesn’t appear in Music, but you can edit the sidebar as described in
Music.
You can now also edit both the sidebar and the tab bar. With the sidebar
displayed, tap Edit to rearrange and delete items. If the tab bar items are
jiggling, you can touch, hold, and drag them to rearrange them as well.
Paste Links Over Text
Until now, making hyperlinks in iOS and iPadOS was a pain; you had to
copy a URL, select the anchor text, and then scroll around to find Insert
Link in the popover menu. Now you can copy a URL, and then select text
in an app like Mail or Notes and tap Paste from the popover to keep the
selected text but add a link to the URL on your clipboard.
SharePlay
Screen sharing in SharePlay now makes remote technical support easy,
thanks to three new features.

--- Page 136 ---
First, you can ask another user to share their screen with you. Doing so
brings up a notification they can tap to share their screen so that they don’t
have to figure out how to do it. Here’s how:
1. While in a FaceTime call, tap the screen to reveal the control panel if it’s
not already displayed.
2. Tap the Share 
 button.
3. Tap Ask to Share.
4. The other person receives a notification. They should tap the purple
Share button.
Second, you can draw on the other person’s screen. Tap the screen sharing
window to make their screen full-screen on your device. Then you can tap
on their screen to produce little circles. You can also draw lines on the
screen to point to what you need them to tap.
Tip: Tapping the zoom 
 button toggles the capability to tap and draw on the other person’s screen.
To move away from screen sharing, open the App Switcher and switch to
another window. However, to end screen sharing without hanging up, the
person sharing their screen must tap the Share 
 button again.

--- Page 137 ---
Finally, you can take full control of the other person’s screen from an iPad.
While viewing another person’s screen, tap the screen sharing window to
make it full screen, and then tap the finger 
 icon. Then person on the other
end sees a notification—once they tap Allow, you can fully interact with
their screen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 138 ---
About This Book
Thank you for purchasing this Take Control book. We hope you find it both
useful and enjoyable to read. We welcome your comments.

--- Page 139 ---
Ebook Extras
You can access extras related to this ebook on the web. Once you’re on the
ebook’s Take Control Extras page, you can:
Download any available new version of the ebook for free, or buy a
subsequent edition at a discount.
Access the book in both PDF and EPUB formats. (Learn about reading
on mobile devices on our Device Advice page.)
Read the ebook’s blog. You may find new tips or information, as well as
a link to an author interview.
Find out if we have any update plans for the ebook.
If you bought this ebook from the Take Control website, it has been
automatically added to your account, where you can download it in other
formats and access any future updates.

--- Page 140 ---
MORE TAKE CONTROL BOOKS
This is but one of many Take Control titles! We have books that cover a wide range of technology
topics, with extra emphasis on Macs and other Apple products.
You can buy Take Control books from the Take Control online catalog as well as from venues such as
Amazon and the Apple Books Store. But it’s a better user experience and our authors earn more when
you buy directly from us. Just saying…
Our ebooks are available in two formats, PDF and EPUB, which are viewable on any computer,
smartphone, tablet, or e-reader. All are DRM-free.
About the Author
Josh Centers is a Content Marketing Manager at TextExpander and editor-
in-chief of Unprepared.life. He is also the author of Take Control of Notes,
Take Control of Apple TV, and Take Control of Apple Home Automation,
and coauthor of Take Control of Preview with Adam Engst. He has been
featured in USA Today, Macworld, Scientific American, the Washington

--- Page 141 ---
Post, Boing Boing, the Wirecutter, and other publications, as well as on
Comedy Central, HuffPost Live, and Voice of America.
Josh lives in Tennessee with his wife and children.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Joe Kissell who helped make this book a reality; my wife for
putting up with me as I wrote this book; and Jesus Christ, who makes all
things possible.
About the Publisher
alt concepts, publisher of Take Control Books, is operated by Joe Kissell
and Morgen Jahnke, who acquired the ebook series from TidBITS
Publishing Inc.’s owners, Adam and Tonya Engst, in 2017. Joe brings his
decades of experience as author of more than 60 books on tech topics
(including many popular Take Control titles) to his role as Publisher.
Morgen’s professional background is in development work for nonprofit
organizations, and she employs those skills as Director of Marketing and
Publicity. Joe and Morgen live in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada, with
their two children.
Credits
Publisher: Joe Kissell

--- Page 142 ---
Editor: Joe Kissell
Cover design: Sam Schick of Neversink
Logo design: Geoff Allen of FUN is OK
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 143 ---
Copyright and Fine Print
Take Control of iOS 18 and iPadOS 18
ISBN: 978-1-990783-55-5
Copyright © 2024, Josh Centers. All rights reserved.
alt concepts, 419 8B-3110 8th St. East, Saskatoon, SK S7H 0W2 Canada
Why Take Control? We designed Take Control electronic books to help
readers regain a measure of control in an oftentimes out-of-control universe.
With Take Control, we also work to streamline the publication process so
that information about quickly changing technical topics can be published
while it’s still relevant and accurate.
Our books are DRM-free: This ebook doesn’t use digital rights
management in any way because DRM makes life harder for everyone. So
we ask a favor of our readers. If you want to share your copy of this ebook
with a friend, please do so as you would a physical book, meaning that if
your friend uses it regularly, they should buy a copy. Your support makes it
possible for future Take Control ebooks to hit the internet long before you’d
find the same information in a printed book. Plus, if you buy the ebook,
you’re entitled to any free updates that become available.
Remember the trees! You have our permission to make a single print copy
of this ebook for personal use, if you must. Please reference this page if a

--- Page 144 ---
print service refuses to print the ebook for copyright reasons.
Caveat lector: Although the author and alt concepts have made a
reasonable effort to ensure the accuracy of the information herein, they
assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. The information in this
book is distributed “As Is,” without warranty of any kind. Neither alt
concepts nor the author shall be liable to any person or entity for any
special, indirect, incidental, or consequential damages, including without
limitation lost revenues or lost profits, that may result (or that are alleged to
result) from the use of these materials. In other words, use this information
at your own risk.
It’s just a name: Many of the designations in this ebook used to distinguish
products and services are claimed as trademarks or service marks. Any
trademarks, service marks, product names, or named features that appear in
this title are assumed to be the property of their respective owners. All
product names and services are used in an editorial fashion only, with no
intention of infringement. No such use, or the use of any trade name, is
meant to convey endorsement or other affiliation with this title.
We aren’t Apple: This title is an independent publication and has not been
authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc. Because of the
nature of this title, it uses terms that are registered trademarks or service
marks of Apple Inc. If you’re into that sort of thing, you can view a
complete list of Apple Inc.’s registered trademarks and service marks.

--- Page 145 ---
OceanofPDF.com