--- Page 2 ---
Vaibbhav Taraate
Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
RTL Design using VHDL


--- Page 3 ---
Vaibbhav Taraate
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra, India
ISBN 978-981-15-1313-8e-ISBN 978-981-15-1314-5
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher,
whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the
rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation,
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or
hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service
marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a
specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective
laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice
and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date
of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a
warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The
publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer
Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway
East, Singapore 189721, Singapore

--- Page 4 ---
Preface
During this decade, the need of the intelligent devices for the data
processing, multimedia applications, and wireless applications has emerged
heavily. Due to demand of the consumers, the leading design houses are
experiencing the shorter design cycle. The real challenge for the design
houses is to launch the products with new features in a shorter span of time.
If we see the mobile data processing, AI, and machine learning, then
every day there are breakthrough inventions. To meet the demand of
consumers, the leading manufacturing houses are trying to work on the
automation with EDA companies.
The era of high-density SOC, where the artificial intelligence can be
embedded into the products and should have the low-power high-speed
architecture, can be realized using the high-density FPGAs. The FPGAs are
emerged as best candidates to realize the high density SOCs. They are cost-
effective, and due to programmable features, they are used for quick
prototyping of ideas. It is like the concept of chip realization using the
complex FPGAs.
The leading FPGA companies like Xilinx and Intel FPGA have the
powerful FPGAs. The architecture of high-density FPGAs is at lower-
technology nodes 28 nanometers and below. The FPGA architecture
supports the low-power high-speed design due to availability of the high-
speed interfaces, on-chip DDR, USB, processor cores, and high-density
fabric to develop the custom logic.
The book is the outcome of my research in the area of SOC design
using high-density Xilinx FPGAs like Spartan-3A (700K Gates), Artix-7,
Zynq, Pynq, and many others. The book has 13 chapters, and it discusses
the ASIC synthesis, design constraints, Design Compiler (DC) commands,
and their use during optimization. The book also discusses the performance
improvement techniques for ASIC and FPGA designs. The book is also
useful to understand the ASIC and FPGA synthesis and SOC prototyping
using FPGAs.
Chapter 1Introduction : This chapter describes ASIC design,
challenges, and design flow. Different types of ASICs and the architecture
and micro-architecture for the ASIC are also discussed in this chapter. This
chapter even discusses the different HDLs, HVLs, and HCL.

--- Page 5 ---
Chapter 2ASIC Design and SOC Prototyping : This chapter
describes the SOC design basics, SOC components, SOC design flow and
challenges during the SOC design. This chapter even discusses the ASIC
prototyping need and role of FPGA during prototyping. This chapter also
discusses the important Design Compiler (DC) commands used during
ASIC synthesis.
Chapter 3Design Using VHDL and Guidelines : This chapter covers
the RTL design guidelines using VHDL and important design scenarios.
This chapter also covers the important aspects of need of synchronizers,
gated clocks, clock enables, and other important scenarios.
Chapter 4VHDL Design Scenarios and Synthesis : This chapter
covers the RTL design scenarios using VHDL. This chapter is useful to
understand the synthesis of RTL design. Important synthesizable constructs,
their use, and synthesis outcomes are explained in this chapter.
Chapter 5Design and Verification Strategies : This chapter discusses
the design and verification strategies for the complex designs. The
architecture design, challenges, and what should be strategy during the RTL
design and verification are discussed in this chapter. The H.264 encoder,
processor architecture design and strategy for efficient RTL design and
verification are elaborated with few important scenarios.
Chapter 6VHDL Design and RTL Tweaks : This chapter covers the
Moore, Mealy FSM, FSM synthesis and performance improvement using
RTL tweaks. The bus arbitration schemes and the RTL and architecture
design for the DSP and video applications are discussed in this chapter. This
chapter even discusses the design strategies and the performance
improvement during RTL stage. Strategies for the clock and reset network
are also described in this chapter.
Chapter 7ASIC Synthesis and Design Constraints : This chapter
covers the ASIC synthesis using Synopsys Design Compiler (DC) and use
of the DC commands during synthesis. This chapter covers the area, timing,
constraints and strategies during ASIC synthesis. Frequently used DC
commands during synthesis and timing closure are described in this chapter.
Chapter 8Design Optimization : This chapter describes the design
optimization using DC. How to optimize the design for the block and chip-
level for the given constraints is discussed with few examples in this
chapter. This chapter is useful to understand the design optimization to
achieve the required goal.

--- Page 6 ---
Chapter 9Design Optimization Scenarios : This chapter covers the
important scenarios which can encounter during the ASIC logic synthesis
and design optimization. The role of DC and optimization for the area,
speed is discussed in this chapter using the relevant DC commands.
Chapter 10FPGA for SOC Prototyping : This chapter discusses the
high-density FPGA architecture and prototyping using FPGA. This chapter
is useful to understand the scenarios and challenges during the FPGA
design and FPGA synthesis for the chip-level constraints.
Chapter 11Prototyping Using Single and Multiple FPGAs : This
chapter covers the prototyping using the single and multiple FPGAs,
guidelines used during prototyping, design partitioning and synthesis
aspects, and the different IO data transfer schemes. Even this chapter is
useful to understand the RTL tweaks during SOC prototype phase. How to
achieve the efficient FPGA prototype is discussed in this chapter.
Chapter 12SOC Design Synthesis and Implementation : This chapter
covers the SOC design, synthesis, and implementation strategies to achieve
the better results during the SOC prototyping phase. This chapter covers the
FPGA synthesis, memory design for FPGA, architecture and tweaks, and
the required conversions during prototyping phase. Implementation of
design using the Xilinx Vivado is discussed in this chapter. Even the chapter
is useful to understand the design partitioning.
Chapter 13SOC Debug and Test Scenarios : This chapter covers the
important strategies during the SOC testing. The important scenarios, debug
and test planning for the prototype using single and multiple FPGAs, and
strategies are discussed in this chapter. The different debug and test
methodologies and test and debug tools used during this phase are also
discussed in this chapter.
As stated, the book consists of the architecture design for the
ASIC/SOC and the practical scenarios encountered during the SOC design
and implementation cycle. The book covers Xilinx devices FPGA
architecture and board bring up. The book is useful to the undergraduate
and postgraduate engineers, SOC designers, RTL designers, system
designers, and SOC prototype engineers as a reference book.
Vaibbhav Taraate (Entrepreneur and Mentor)

--- Page 7 ---
Acknowledgements
The book is outcome of my work in the area of FPGA, ASIC and SOC
designs. The book is possible due to help of many people. I am thankful to
design engineers with whom I shared my thoughts in various multinational
corporations. I am thankful to all those entrepreneurs, design/verification
engineers and managers with whom I worked in the past almost around 18
years.
I am thankful to the Springer Nature staff, especially Swati Meherishi,
Parimel, Rini Christy and Ashok Kumar for their great support.
I am thankful to my wife Somi and my dearest friend Kaju for their
great support and good wishes during this period. Thankful to my Son
Siddhesh and my daughter Kajal for their wonderful ideas while creating
outline of this book.
Thankful to my students Nikhil, Akshat, Vishwanath for attending my
sessions on VHDL and FPGA. They have indirectly contributed in this book
by expressing their out of box ideas to implement the IPs and products.
Special thanks in advance to all the readers and engineers for buying,
reading and enjoying this book!

--- Page 8 ---
Contents
1 Introduction
1. 1 ASIC Design
1. 1. 1 Types of ASIC [3]
1. 2 Design Challenges
1. 3 ASIC Design Flow
1. 4 Need of HDL? 
1. 5 Hardware Description Languages
1. 6 Hardware Construction and IP Design
1. 7 ASIC/ SOC Design Challenges and Areas
1. 8 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
2 ASIC Design and SOC Prototyping
2. 1 SOC Design
2. 2 SOC Design Flow
2. 2. 1 Design Specifications and System Architecture
2. 2. 2 RTL Design and Functional Verification
2. 2. 3 Synthesis and Timing Verification
2. 2. 4 Physical Design and Verification
2. 2. 5 Prototype and Test
2. 3 SOC Prototyping and Challenges
2. 4 ASIC Prototyping
2. 5 Important Design Compiler (DC) Commands
2. 6 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
3 Design Using VHDL and Guidelines
3. 1 RTL Design Guidelines

--- Page 9 ---
3. 2 RTL Design Practical Scenarios
3. 2. 1 Incomplete Sensitivity List
3. 2. 2 Case Versus If-then-else
3. 3 Grouping the Terms
3. 4 Tristate Buses and Logic
3. 5 Resource Sharing
3. 6 Level Synchronizer
3. 7 Gated Clocks
3. 8 Clock Enables
3. 9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
4 VHDL Design Scenarios and Synthesis
4. 1 Multiple Clock Domain and Code Converters
4. 1. 1 Binary to Gray Code Converter
4. 1. 2 Gray to Binary Code Converter
4. 2 Synthesis for Multiple Architecture
4. 3 Signal Definition and Synthesis
4. 4 Variable Assignment and Synthesis
4. 5 Multiple Process Blocks and Synthesis
4. 6 Synthesis for Nested If-then-else
4. 7 Case Construct and Synthesis
4. 8 Priority Logic Using Synthesizable Constructs
4. 9 Synthesis of Parity Logic
4. 10 Latch Based Design and Synthesis
4. 11 PIPO Registers and Synthesis
4. 12 Synthesis and Logic Inference of Shift Register

--- Page 10 ---
4. 13 Edge Detection Logic and Synthesis
4. 14 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
5 Design and Verification Strategies
5. 1 Design Strategies for Complex Designs
5. 2 RTL Design Strategies for SOC
5. 3 Processor Architecture Case Study [1]
5. 4 Processor Architecture and Micro-architecture
5. 4. 1 Processor Micro-architecture
5. 5 RTL Top-Level Design and Synthesis [1]
5. 5. 1 Block-Level Design
5. 5. 2 Top-Level Design
5. 6 Strategies for SOC Verification
5. 7 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
6 VHDL Design and RTL Tweaks
6. 1 Reset Strategies
6. 1. 1 Asynchronous Reset
6. 1. 2 Synchronous Reset
6. 2 State Machines
6. 2. 1 Moore Machine
6. 2. 2 Mealy Machine
6. 3 RTL Design of Moore Machine
6. 4 RTL Design of Mealy Machine
6. 5 FSM Synthesis and Optimization
6. 6 Data Transfer and Arbiter Design

--- Page 11 ---
6. 6. 1 Bus Arbitration
6. 7 DSP-Based Designs and RTL Strategies
6. 8 Recommended RTL Tweaks
6. 9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
7 ASIC Synthesis and Design Constraints
7. 1 Design Partitioning for Complex Designs
7. 2 ASIC Synthesis
7. 3 Synthesis Using Design Compiler (DC)
7. 4 DC Commands Used During Synthesis
7. 4. 1 DC Commands to Read the Design
7. 4. 2 DC Commands to Check the Design
7. 4. 3 DC Commands to Define Skew
7. 4. 4 DC Commands to Specify Input and Output Delay
7. 4. 5 DC Commands to Specify Minimum (Min) and Maximum
(Max) Delay
7. 4. 6 Command Used to Perform Synthesis
7. 4. 7 DC Command to Save the Design
7. 5 Design Optimization Constraints and Basic Script
7. 6 Clock Network Latency
7. 7 Generated Clock
7. 8 Clock Muxing and False Paths
7. 9 Clock Gating
7. 10 Multicycle Paths
7. 11 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference

--- Page 12 ---
8 Design Optimization
8. 1 ASIC Synthesis and Design Constraints
8. 1. 1 Block-Level Synthesis and Constraints
8. 1. 2 Chip-Level Synthesis and Constraints
8. 2 Design Rule Constraints (DRC)
8. 2. 1 max_ fanout
8. 2. 2 max_ transition
8. 2. 3 max_ capacitance
8. 3 Optimization Constraints
8. 3. 1 set_ dont_ use
8. 3. 2 set_ dont_ touch
8. 3. 3 set_ prefer
8. 3. 4 Command for the Design Flattening
8. 3. 5 Commands Used for Structuring
8. 3. 6 Group and Ungroup Commands
8. 4 FSM Optimization
8. 5 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
9 Design Optimization Scenarios
9. 1 Where Is the Issue in Optimization? 
9. 2 Design Optimization Strategies for the SOC
9. 3 Compilation Strategies
9. 3. 1 Top-Down Compilation
9. 3. 2 Bottom-up Compilation
9. 4 Strategies for Area Optimization
9. 4. 1 Do not Use Combinational Logic as Individual Block

--- Page 13 ---
9. 4. 2 Do not Use Glue Logic Between Two Modules
9. 4. 3 Use of set_ max_ area Attribute
9. 4. 4 Area Report
9. 5 Strategies for Timing Optimization and Performance
Improvement
9. 5. 1 Design Compilation with ‘map_ effort_ high’
9. 5. 2 Use of group_ path Command
9. 5. 3 Setup Time Analysis and Check
9. 5. 4 Hold Time Analysis and Check
9. 5. 5 Submodule Characterization 
9. 5. 6 Register Balancing
9. 5. 7 Multicycle Paths
9. 6 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
References
10 FPGA for SOC Prototyping
10. 1 Xilinx 7 Series FPGA
10. 1. 1 Xilinx 7 Series CLB Architecture
10. 1. 2 Xilinx 7 Series Block RAM
10. 1. 3 Xilinx 7 Series DSP
10. 1. 4 Xilinx 7 Series Clocking
10. 1. 5 XILINX 7 Series IO
10. 1. 6 Xilinx 7 Series Transceivers
10. 1. 7 In-Built IPs
10. 1. 8 Built-In Monitor
10. 2 Synthesis and Implementation Flow [2]
10. 2. 1 How Logic Is Mapped Using CLBs? 

--- Page 14 ---
10. 2. 2 How DSP Blocks Are Mapped? 
10. 2. 3 How Memory Blocks Are Mapped Inside FPGA? 
10. 3 The Techniques for the Better Optimization
10. 3. 1 Multipliers and Resource Sharing
10. 3. 2 Logic Duplication for the Larger Decoding Logic
10. 4 Strategies for SOC Prototyping
10. 5 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
References
11 Prototyping Using Single and Multiple FPGAs
11. 1 Choosing the Target FPGA
11. 2 SOC Prototyping Using Single FPGA
11. 3 How to Reduce the Risk During the Prototyping? 
11. 4 Prototyping Using Multiple FPGAs
11. 5 Deferred Interconnects
11. 6 Onboard Delay Timing [1]
11. 7 Strategies and Guidelines for the Efficient Prototyping
11. 7. 1 General Guidelines and Project Planning [1]
11. 7. 2 IO Planning and Strategies to Minimize Pin Count [1]
11. 8 IO Planning and Constraints [1]
11. 9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
References
12 SOC Design Synthesis and Implementation
12. 1 Design Partitioning and Goals
12. 2 Challenges in the Design Partitioning
12. 3 How to Overcome the Partitioning Challenges [1]
12. 3. 1 Architecture Level

--- Page 15 ---
12. 3. 2 Synthesis at Netlist Level [1]
12. 4 Need of the EDA Tools for the Design Partitioning [1]
12. 4. 1 Manual Partitioning
12. 4. 2 Automatic Partitioning
12. 5 Synthesis for the Better Prototype Outcome [1]
12. 5. 1 Fast Synthesis for Initial Resource Estimation
12. 5. 2 Incremental Synthesis
12. 6 Constraints and Synthesis for FPGA Designs [1]
12. 7 IO Pad Synthesis for FPGA
12. 8 What Care I Should Take During Synthesis and Prototyping? 
12. 8. 1 Avoid Use of Latches
12. 8. 2 Avoid Longer Combinational Paths
12. 8. 3 Avoid the Combinational Loops
12. 8. 4 Use Wrappers
12. 8. 5 Memory Modeling
12. 8. 6 Use of core Generators
12. 8. 7 Formal Verification
12. 8. 8 Blocks not Mapping on the FPGA
12. 8. 9 Better Architecture Design
12. 8. 10 Use Clock Logic at TOP LEVEL
12. 8. 11 Bottom-Up Approach
12. 9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
13 SOC Debug and Test Scenarios
13. 1 SOC Design and Considerations
13. 2 Prototyping Challenges and How to Overcome Them? 

--- Page 16 ---
13. 3 Multiple FPGA Architecture and Limiting Factors
13. 4 Board Bring-Up and What to Test? 
13. 5 Debug Plan and Checklist
13. 5. 1 Basic Tests for the FPGA
13. 5. 2 Add-On Board Tests
13. 5. 3 Test the External Logic Analyzer Buses
13. 5. 4 Multiple FPGA Connectivity and IO Test
13. 5. 5 Test for the Multiple FPGA Partitioning
13. 6 What Are Different Issues on the FPGA Boards
13. 7 Testing for the Multiple FPGA Interface
13. 8 Debug Logic and Use of Logic Analyzers
13. 8. 1 Probing Using IO Pins
13. 8. 2 Use the Test MUX
13. 8. 3 Use of Logic Analyzer:  Practical Scenario (to Detect the
Data Packet Is Corrupted)
13. 8. 4 Oscilloscope to Debug the Design
13. 8. 5 Debugging Using ILA Cores
13. 9 System-Level Verification and Debugging
13. 9. 1 Hardware/ Software Co-verification
13. 9. 2 Transactors and Transaction-Level Modeling
13. 10 SOC Prototyping Future
13. 11 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Reference
Appendix:  Xilinx 7 Series Family
Index

--- Page 17 ---
About the Author
Vaibbhav Taraateis Entrepreneur and Mentor at “1 Rupee S T”. He
holds a B.E. (Electronics) degree from Shivaji University, Kolhapur, in
1995 and secured a gold medal for standing first in all engineering
branches. He has completed his M.Tech. (Aerospace Control and Guidance)
in 1999 from IIT Bombay. He has over 18 years of experience in semi-
custom ASIC and FPGA design, primarily using HDL languages such as
Verilog and VHDL. He has worked with few multinational corporations as
consultant, senior design engineer, and technical manager. His areas of
expertise include RTL design using VHDL, RTL design using Verilog,
complex FPGA-based design, low power design, synthesis/optimization,
static timing analysis, system design using microprocessors, high-speed
VLSI designs, and architecture design of complex SOCs.
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 18 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_1
1. Introduction
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“The complexity of ASIC design has grown exponentially in the past
50 years.”
Abstract
During this decade, the complexity of the ASIC design has increased
substantially. The need of the ASICs in the wireless, automotive, medical,
and other high-processing application has grown. The objective of this
chapter is to have discussion about the ASICs and the challenges in the
ASIC designs. The chapter even discusses the ASIC design flow, process
node evolution, and the basics of SOC architecture. The chapter is useful to
understand the processes involved in the design of SOC.
KeywordsASIC – SOC – ASSP – Standard cell – Gate array – Structured
ASIC – Synthesis – IP – Micro – Multitasking – Clock rate – Data rate –
Bandwidth
The ASIC design for the complex functionality using billion gate logic is
the need of this decade. The application areas may be wireless
communication, high speed computing or the video processing. In all these
areas we need to have the high speed ASIC chips. The prototype using

--- Page 19 ---
FPGAs for such ASIC or SOC is key to measure the performance and to
reduce the re-spin of the ASIC design. In this context the chapter discusses
about the ASIC design flow, ASIC prototyping and challenges.
1.1 ASIC Design
The Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) complexity has
grown exponentially in the past two decades. Most of the design companies
have started working on the 10 nanometer and 7 nanometer technology
nodes. According to the Moore’s law, the number of transistors in dense
integrated circuits will double in approximately 18–24 months. Moore’s law
has limitation due to the shrinking and the functional complexity of
the design. Most of the design companies are facing the real challenges due
to shrinking area, low power requirements, and the requirement of high
speed.
The ASICs are designed for some specific applications, and most of the
time, we observe the application of such designs in automobile,
communication, high-speed data processing, and even in the defense
 applications.
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) is designed for the
specific purpose or application. The ASIC chips are designed using full-
custom or semi-custom design flow. The full-custom design starts from the
scratch, and required cells are designed and characterized for the specific
process node. In case of semi-custom ASIC design, the pre-validated
standard cells and libraries are used and the required additional cells are
designed and characterized depending on the requirements for the desired
process node. The additional required functionality may be the design of
standard cells, IPs, and other custom logic. The ASIC design flow is
classified as frontend design flow that is logic design and synthesis and
backend that is physical design flow.
The overall ASIC design cycle starts with the market survey and
requirement capture, and the frontend design flow involves the important
steps as: design entry using hardware description languages, functional
verification of ASIC, synthesis and pre-layout timing analysis.
The backend design flow involves the important milestones: floorplan,
powerplan, clock tree synthesis, placement, and routing of the design, and
finally, the post-layout timing analysis and the testing of the chip.

--- Page 20 ---
Due to the complex design specifications, it is requirement that the
chip architect and design team members should understand the functional
specifications at the top level to evolve the strategies for the hardware and
software partitioning.
The ASIC can be design of processor, video decoders, and chips
for complex digital communication algorithms; in all such designs, the
understanding of functional specification and evolution of the efficient
architecture and micro-architecture documentation plays important and
crucial role.
The complex SOC architecture can be evolved by understanding of the
functional specifications, block level and top level functionality, timing,
area and speed requirements. The top-level team of experts is involved in
architecture definition for the design. During the design cycle the efficient
architecture and micro-architecture document will paly the important role.
What the architecture and micro-architecture document describe?
The architecture and micro-architecture document should describe
following:
1. Top-level details of functional blocks 
2. Block-level details and interfaces 
3. Timing requirements  
4. Memory requirements  
5. Hardware and software partitioning details 
6. Area, speed, and power requirements 
7. Electrical and mechanical specifications 
8. IP requirements  
9. Information about the prototype boards. 

--- Page 21 ---
During the present decade, the SOC design flow has become
very complex and involves many teams to complete the milestones such as;
processor/IP design, architecture and micro-architecture design, RTL design
and verification, synthesis, and timing closure, implementation and testing
at system level.
The major challenges in such kind of design are listed below, and
mainly, they are
(1)Architecture design and system partitioning for the complex
functionality  
(2)Power management to meet the required power constraints 
(3)Selection of IPs and their timing  
(4)Full chip verification  
(5)Required test planning and EDA tools  
(6)Test verification methodology and board design  
(7)Deep submicron effect and integration  
(8)Time to market  
(9)Advance processes and simulation models.  
The SOC which can be used in the mobile communication is shown in
Fig. 1.1. It has the video and audio processors, internal storage, general
purpose processor I, II, internal memory, and memory controllers. Even
such kind of chip has BIST logic with other network interfaces. The video
and audio data streams are available as separate interfaces.

--- Page 22 ---
Fig. 1.1SOC for multimedia applications
Due to the requirement of the high-density data processing, such kind of
ASICs should have parallelism. This can be accomplished by the use of the
multiple processor architecture.
1.1.1 Types of ASIC [3]
As stated earlier, the chip designed for the specific purpose or application is
called as Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC). Mainly, the
ASIC can consists of the multiple processors, the memories and other
functional blocks with the high speed interface modules. The chip can have
analog or digital blocks. For example, consider the design of the digital
communication system consisting of transmitter or receivers. Such kind of
chips should have the transmitter and receiver logic and should operate on

--- Page 23 ---
the digital data. The chip may have one or more than one processor to
perform the parallel processing of the data and should meet the required
performance criteria.
An integrated circuit (IC) is made up of silicon wafer, and each wafer
can have thousands of dies. Most of the time, we often come across the
term which is Application-Specific Standard Product (ASSP), and they are
available in the market by quoting part numbers, for example, the processor
chips, video decoders, audio and DSP processing chips.
ASICs are primarily classified into following categories, and they are
named as:
Full-custom ASIC
Semi-custom ASIC
Gate array ASIC
Full-Custom ASIC: The design which has done from the scratch is called
as full-custom ASIC. The design flow of such design includes the design
and validation of the required cells or gates. The pre-defined cells are not
used in such kind of ASIC. Consider the design scenario where the design
specifications are given to the design team with the requirement of the
speed, power, and area. If the existing cell does not meet the required
performance criteria, then the option is to design the required cells for the
target process node. The design cycle in such type of ASIC is longer due to
design of standard cells, macros, and validation of them.
Semi-Custom ASIC: In such kind of the design, the existing standard cells
of logic gates (AND, OR, NOT, and EXOR), MUX, flip-flop, and latch are
used. In this, design team uses the standard cell library, where the cells are
already pre-designed and pre-tested. This involves the lesser time to market,
lesser investments, and even the low risk as compare to full-custom design.
Consider the scenario where the standard cell and macros are pre-designed
and validated for the 10-nanometer process node. Now the specifications
are given to the design team to design the memory controller using 10-
nanometer process node. In such kind of scenario, the design team uses the
pre-designed, pre-tested standard cell libraries. This reduces design cycle
time and the risk during design cycle. The standard cell libraries are
designed using the full-custom design flow only, and the standard cells can
be individually optimized.

--- Page 24 ---
Gate Array ASIC: The gate array ASICs are further classified as
Channeled gate array
Channel less gate array
Structured gate array
In the gate array ASIC, the design involves the base array and base cell.
The base array is the pre-defined required pattern of the transistors on the
gate array. The base cell is broadly described as the smallest element in the
base array. In such kind of ASICs, the cell layout is same for all the cells
but interconnects between the cells and inside of the cell is customized.
1.2 Design Challenges
There are many challenges in the complex SOC designs, and most of the
ITRS reports describe following important highlights related to the
ASIC/SOC physical design:
1. Interconnects and noise at higher frequencies: The real challenges at
high frequency are
i. Noise immunity and noise margin  
ii. Signal integrity and data convergence issues 
iii.Nonlinearity in the delay variations 
iv. Cross-coupling of the devices.  
 
2. Power constraints: Due to non-ideal scaling of parasitic and supply or
threshold voltage, it really impacts on the power constraints for the
design.
 
3. Interconnect performance and limitation: One of the main
challenges is how to scale the performance of interconnect to have the
data integrity and convergence.
 

--- Page 25 ---
4. System clock and synchronization: The real requirement for any
ASIC or SOC design is to have uniform clock skew. In such scenario,
the uniform distribution of clock with required synchronization is the
real challenge.
 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) pays
much more attentions on the chip-level system design and the design
strategies. ITRS assesses the design trends, design technologies, and future
development to make the SOC designs more robust. ITRS produces the
roadmap with new additions which can be even applied to the billion gate
SOC designs. The major objective of ITRS is to produce roadmap for the IC
design.
The key points in most of the roadmaps by ITRS are the cost of the
design, manufacturing cycle time, and the target design technology. For the
semiconductor customers, the major challenge is the NRE cost which is of
millions of dollars. Few of the ITRS roadmaps produced in the past decade
focus on the reduction in the cost of the design. The main message from
such roadmaps is that the NRE cost for mask and testing has reached up to
few hundred million dollars during this decade and if due to design
specification changes or due to major shortfalls in the design if design
respins, then such costs will multiply. Due to the shrinking process
technology, the design product life cycle has shorten and due to that the
time to market is very critical issue for the semiconductor design and
manufacturing companies.
If we consider ASIC design, then the design or verification cycle is few
months and manufacturing time in few weeks. There are uncertainties in the
design and verification but low uncertainty in the chip manufacturing.
Under such circumstances, the investments in the process technology have
dominated the investments in the design technology. But the important
point is that the design cost of the power-efficient ASICs/SOCs during year
2016 was almost around few million dollars versus the hundreds of million
dollar investments in the past decade.
Still if we consider ASIC applications, they need software and hardware
communication; so during this decade, systems are typically of the
embedded type. Almost around 70–80% of the cost is invested to develop
software for such systems. During this decade, the ASIC test cost has

--- Page 26 ---
significantly grown and for any complex design, the cost of verification is
much more as compare to the design cost!
The ITRS assessment and the roadmap are classified into two major
verticals. One is the silicon complexity which is related to the physical
design of the chip, and other is the system complexity which is related to
the system design scenarios and complex functionality.
Design and manufacturing companies need to think about all these
challenges during the design of lowcost, lowpower ASIC chips. During this
decade, we are witnessing the real limitation in shrinking, and doubling of
the transistors in dense integrated circuits and it has the significant impact
on the overall roadmap for the new processors availability!
Apart from these physical design challenges, the system designer needs
to think about the cost for the verification and testing, the long verification
cycle, the block reuse for the hierarchical designs, hardware and software
co-designs, and last but not least, the design/verification team size and the
geographical locations.
1.3 ASIC Design Flow
To design the ASICs, the product idea or market survey is important
milestone. The data available during market survey can be used to
finalise the functional specifications and it plays important role. During the
market survey, the team can extract following:
1. Available similar kinds of products in market 
2. Features of products  
3. Electrical specifications and mechanical assembly 
4. Price range of the products  
5. Is the product has upgradable features. 
The functional specifications are useful for the ASIC design team as it
gives information about the overall features and the broad application areas
(Fig. 1.2).

--- Page 28 ---
Fig. 1.2Few important steps in ASIC design
1. Design specifications: The ASIC specifications include functional,
electrical, and mechanical specification and characteristics of the logic
and functional blocks. For example, the mobile SOC should have the
processor, memory controller, external interfaces, high-resolution
camera, high-resolution display, etc. For all the required components, it
is essential to have understanding of the speed, latency, throughput,
data rate and bandwidth.
 
2. Architecture design: By using the design specification, the
architecture and micro-architecture document can be created. The ASIC
design is partitioned into small blocks, and the block-level design with
interface details can be documented at the higher level. For example, if
ASIC uses processor as one of the functional block then during
architecture design milestone the architect team should consider
the speed requirements, external interfaces, pipelining, IO throughput.
By using these details, the architecture and micro-architecture for the
ASIC can be evolved. Although it is time consuming and
iterative process, it is one of the major milestones as this document is
used throughout the ASIC design cycle.
 
3. Logic design and synthesis: ASIC logic design involves the design
partitioning, RTL design, RTL verification, synthesis, test insertion, and
the pre-layout timing analysis. During the pre-layout STA, the goal is to
fix up the setup time violations for the various functional blocks.
Figure 1.3 gives information about the ASIC logic design at higher
level.
 

--- Page 29 ---
Fig. 1.3Important steps in ASIC logic design
1. Market survey to extract the specification requirement for the
ASIC or SOC. The specification can be functional, electrical, and
mechanical for the required speed and power.
 
2. Architecture design: Specification understanding and
architectural and micro-architecture for the ASIC or SOC design.
The block-level representation for the design with other interface
and timing details.
 

--- Page 30 ---
3. Design using HDL: RTL design using HDL (VHDL, Verilog or
using SystemVerilog).  
4. RTL Verification: Exhaustive dynamic simulation of the design, to
verify the functionality of the design.  
5. Test insertion, DFT memory BIST insertion, for designs
containing memory elements.  
6. Environment setting: This includes the technology library to be
used, along with other environmental attributes.  
7. Design constraints and synthesis: Constraining and synthesis of
the design with scan insertion (and optional JTAG) using Design
Compiler.
 
8. Block-level STA: using Design Compiler’s built-in static timing
analysis engine.  
9. Formal verification: RTL comparison against the synthesized
netlist, using Formality.  
10.Pre-layout STA: Full chip design STA using PrimeTime.  
4. Physical Design Flow: The physical design flow uses the gate-level
netlist which is outcome of the logic synthesis, and it is shown in
Fig. 1.4.
 

--- Page 31 ---
Fig. 1.4Important steps in the physical design flow

--- Page 32 ---
The important steps are documented below:
1. Forward annotation: Forward annotation of timing constraints to the
layout tool.  
2. Floorplanning: Initial floorplanning with timing driven placement of
cells, clock tree insertion, and global routing.  
3. CTS: Transfer of clock tree to the original design (netlist) residing in
Design Compiler.  
4. IPO: In-place optimization (IPO) of the design in Design Compiler.  
5. Formal verification: Verification between the synthesized netlist and
clock tree inserted netlist, using Formality.  
6. Timing delay extraction: Extraction of estimated timing delays from
the layout after the global routing step.  
7. Back annotation: Back annotation of estimated timing data from the
global routed design, to PrimeTime.  
8. STA: Static timing analysis in PrimeTime, using the estimated delays
extracted after performing global route.  
9. Detailed Routing: Detailed routing of the design. Extraction of real
timing delays from the detailed routed design.  
10.Back annotate timing data: Back annotation of the real extracted
timing data to PrimeTime.  
11. Post-Layout STA: Post-layout static timing analysis using PrimeTime. 
12.Post-Layout simulation: Functional gate-level simulation of the
design with post-layout timing (if required).  
13.Tape out: Tape out after LVS and DRC verification.  

--- Page 33 ---
1.4 Need of HDL?
Before the evolution of the hardware description languages (HDLs), the
designers had tough time to describe the design using the schematic
capture. The C and C++ are high-level languages and used to develop the
functional model for the design. Whereas the HDLs are used to describe the
hardware. Table 1.1 gives the overview of the C, C++ and HDL.
Table 1.1Important highlights of C/C++ and HDL
ParametersProgramming language (C or C++) HDL
Instructions or
constructs
The language is best suitable for the
sequential execution due to the
constructs
Supports both the sequential and
concurrent constructs
Description
style
The main objective to code the
functionality of the design. The
programmer uses the analytical,
logical thinking to develop the
behavior model
The description is Register Transfer
Level (RTL) and the main objective is to
infer the required gate-level structure
Resources and
usage
The main intention of programmer is
to develop the algorithm, and the
programmer never considers the area,
speed, and power requirements
The designer needs to consider the
resources required, parallelism, and
concurrency. Even designer should use the
area, power, and speed constraint to
achieve the better results
Application Should be used as programming
language to describe the functionality.
In other words, it is mixture of
assembly and high-level language
Should be used to describe the hardware as
it has synthesizable constructs. Due to use
of non-synthesizable constructs, this can
be also used to verify the design
functionality
Time
constructs
It does not support the notion of timeIt supports the time constructs and the
notion of time
Flow
constructs
Due to sequential execution it
supports the data flow
HDL supports the data and control flow
From Table 1.1, it is clear that as C and C++ do not support
concurrency, time constructs, and control flow. Hence, we need to use the
HDL to describe the hardware.
1.5 Hardware Description Languages

--- Page 34 ---
To describe the hardware, the popular description languages used in the
industry are VHDL, Verilog, and System Verilog. Table 1.2 gives the
information about the evolution of HDL with their standard.
Table 1.2HDL evolution and their standards
HDL Description Application Standard
AHDL Analog hardware
description language
Open source and used for analog
verification
1980
Verilog-
AMS
Verilog for analog and
mixed signals
Open standard and used for the mix of
digital and analog simulation
Derived from
IEEE 1364
VHDL-
AMS
VHDL for analog and
mixed signals
Standard language for both the analog and
digital mixed signal simulation
IEEE 1076.1-
2007
VHDL Very high speed integrated
circuits HDL
(VHSICHDL)
Used for the design and verification of
digital logic
IEEE 1076-
2008
Verilog Widely used hardware
description language
Used for the design and verification of
digital logic
IEEE 1364-
2005
ABEL Advanced boolean
expression language
Used for the PLD-based design None
System CThe high-level abstraction
language for the hardware
designs
It uses the C++ classes for higher-level
behavioral and transaction-level modeling
(TLM) for describing hardware at system
level
IEEE 1666-
2011
System
Verilog
Superset of Verilog Used to address the system level design and
verification
IEEE 1800-
2017
1.6 Hardware Construction and IP Design
Chisel is hardware construction language (HCL) developed by UC
Berkeley. The main objective of this language is to design hardware using
parameterized generators. Few of the important highlights of the language
are
1. It is open-source hardware construction language.  
2. It has algebraic construction and wiring and embedded in Scala
programming language.  

--- Page 35 ---
3. The main highlight is that it has bulk connections with the abstract data
types and interfaces.  
4. Used for the hierarchical, object-oriented, and functional constructions. 
5. It supports the layering of the domain-specific languages. 
6. It is highly parameterized using metaprogramming in Scala. 
7. Supports floating point and multiple clock domain designs. 
8. The important highlight is that it generates the Verilog which can be
used by the leading FPGA and ASIC tools.  
Due to the powerful features, the language can be used as hardware
construction language, and we can see the growing demand for such
language due to shrinking time to market. The discussion on chisel is out of
scope in this book.
1.7 ASIC/SOC Design Challenges and Areas
The twenty-first century ASIC and SOC design should have the parallel
processors as Moore’s law has reached its limitations on the speed of the
ASICs and power dissipation. If we perceive the design future, then there
will be always challenges in the ASIC and SOC designs due to demands of
consumers. Nowadays, every human being is interested in having
smartphones, intelligent control appliances, and the gadgets. The fun will be
during coming decade when the massive parallelism in the design of the
ASICs and SOCs will try to change the design processes and algorithms.
There are many challenges which need to be addressed; few of them I have
imagined, and they are documented below:
1. ASICs can be designed for the high bandwidth and reliable
communications to meet the requirements of the end customers. 
2. Google-like companies can use the ASICs in the quantum computing
systems for the speech recognition.  

--- Page 36 ---
3. Artificial intelligence area will face the challenges due to shrinking
process node and those can be overcome by using the parallelism and
parallel processing engines.
 
4. The medical diagnosis field will consume the large number of ASICs,
and new SOCs will be evolved with the parallel processors. 
5. Text-to-speech synthesis area will evolve using the parallel processor-
based SOCs.  
6. The automation in the vehicle controls to give more user-friendly
controls to the end user will evolve and can be accomplished by the
SOC designs.
 
7. With improved computing and processing power, the SOCs even can
be used to control the robots in the hazardous areas with more
precision and accuracy.
 
8. The intelligent sensors, cameras, and scanners to identify the
dangerous articles without intervention of human beings can be
evolved by using the multi-SOC designs.
 
9. The automations in the hospitals to monitor the health of the patient
from long distance are one of the areas which can evolve using the
multi processors and SOCs.
 
10.As less area, high speed, and less power is the requirement in all kinds
of the ASICs and SOCs, we may witness the technology shift and
algorithm evolutions to support the massive parallelism during this
decade.
 
1.8 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
As discussed earlier, the following are few important takeaways to conclude
the chapter
1. The ASICs are designed for the specific applications and can have
analog and digital blocks.  

--- Page 37 ---
2. The ASICs can be classified as full-custom, semi-custom, and
programmable ASICs.  
3. For larger density ASIC designs, the design partitioning plays
important role to define the interface boundaries.  
4. Popular HDLs are VHDL, Verilog, System Verilog, and chisel is
Hardware Construction Language(HCL).  
5. Architecture and micro-architecture for ASICs is used as reference
document throughout the ASIC design cycle.  
6. During pre-layout STA, the objective is to fix all the setup time
violations.  
7. During the post-layout STA, all the timing violations (setup, hold time
violations) should be fixed.  
8. FPGA can be used to prototype the design. If design has complex
features and has larger density, then the multiple FPGA platforms can
be used.
 
In the next chapter we will discuss about the ASIC design and SOC
prototype basics and the important challenges. The Chap. 2 also useful to
understand about the SOC design flow, design, verification and
prototype for SOC designs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 38 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_2
2. ASIC Design and SOC Prototyping
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“The overall ASIC design and verification cycle consume 80% of
the efforts.”
Abstract
The chapter discusses the ASIC design concepts, SOC prototyping basics,
and the challenges in ASIC/SOC designs. The chapter even discusses
important Design Compiler (DC) commands used during the synthesis and
design optimization phase. The chapter is useful to understand the basics of
SOC prototyping and important challenges during the prototype phase using
high-density FPGAs.
KeywordsFPGA – ASIC – SOC – Prototype – Design compiler – SOC
components – Architecture – Micro-architecture – RTL design – Test
With reference to the frequently used SOC blocks, the SOC design flow and
prototype challenges are discussed in this chapter.
2.1 SOC Design

--- Page 39 ---
In the current century, the design complexity has grown up due to the need
of intelligent products and features. The ASIC/SOC area has emerged in the
automotive, consumer, medical, wireless communication and multimedia
applications. To design such kind of high density logic, the SOC should
consist of the multiple processors, high-speed bus interfaces, memory
controllers, and other interfaces. Consider the SOC shown in the Fig. 2.1. It
gives information about frequently used blocks. In design of such SOCs, the
following points need to be considered.
1. What is overall speed of the SOC?  
2. Is architecture has parallel processing engine?  
3. Is there adequate internal memory?  
4. What is the overall power requirements?  
5. What is the process/technology node and what should be the prototype
platform?  
6. What are the IP requirements?  
7. What are analog, digital components/IPs and EDA tools required? 
8. How much time is required to get full-chip design, verification and
protoype?  
With reference to the SOC architecture shown in Fig. 2.1, the following
are few important highlights and should be considered during SOC design
and verification phase.

--- Page 40 ---
Fig. 2.1SOC architecture
1. Multiple processor architecture: The need is to have parallel
processing of the data, and in that context, the SOC should have the
multiple processors. The parallelism can improve the speed of overall
design. As shown, the SOC uses processor to perform the general-
purpose computation and the video processor to perform the processing
of high stream video data. While designing such kind of SOCs, the
architect team should take care of the speed of buses, bandwidth of
 

--- Page 41 ---
overall system, data rate, latency, and throughput. Additonal pipelining
features can be incorporated to improve the overall SOC architecture.
2. Memory and memory controller: What is the memory requirement
for such kind of design? The internal storage and the external memory
interfaces should have the least latency during read and write
operations. Depending on the data rate requirements, the memory
controllers can be designed. The DDR or SDRAM controller or NAND
flash they can be designed or their IPs can be used to achieve the better
prototype.
 
3. Serial interfaces: What are the serial interfaces required and what
should be their speed? Most of the time, we need to have the I2C, SPI,
UART for the serial communication.
 
4. High-speed interfaces: If the SOC has the USB and Bluetooth, then
what should be standard and what are the challenges during integration
is another important point to discuss while evolving the architecture.
 
5. DMA controller: For the direct memory access without involving the
processor, what should be the design strategy? What kind of bus
interfaces is required and what is the speed of data transfer? That
should be thought during the architecture evolution phase!
 
6. Analog blocks: For the analog interfaces, the SOC should have the
ADCs and DACs. The architect needs to consider about the sampling
rate of ADC, conversion time, resolution of DAC, and linearity.
 
7. Clocking resources: The in-built oscillators and PLLs can be used to
generate the clocks with the uniform clock skew and can be used as
clock source for the multiple clock domain SOC design components.
 
Apart from the above, the electrical characteristics and speed, power,
area should be considered during SOC architecture design phase. The
extraction of the block-level and top-level constraints for the required
technology library should be done during the evolution of the architecture
of SOC.
The next few sections are used to know more about the SOC design
flow and important milestones.

--- Page 42 ---
2.2 SOC Design Flow
With the evolution of VLSI design technology, the ASIC or SOC designs
are becoming more and more complex and SOC-based design is feasible in
shorter design cycle time. The demand of the customers to deliver product
in the shorter design cycle time is possible by using efficient design flow.
The design needs to be evolved from specification stage to final layout. The
use of EDA tools with the suitable features has made it possible to have the
bug-free designs with proven functionality. The design flow is shown in
Fig. 2.2, and it consists of the following important milestones.

--- Page 43 ---
Fig. 2.2SOC design flow
2.2.1 Design Specifications and System Architecture
Extracting the design functional specifications for the ASIC or ASSP
is important phase, and during this phase, the extensive market research
should be done to freeze the functional specifications of the design.
Consider the mobile SOC; then, few important functional specification can
be, speed of processor, functional specification of processor, internal
memory, display and its resolution, camera and resolution of camera,

--- Page 44 ---
external communication interfaces, etc. More than this, it is essential to
have information about the mechanical assembly and other electrical
characteristics of the device. They may be power supply requirements and
battery charging circuit and safety features. The specifications are used to
sketch the top-level floorplan of the chip which we can call as architecture
of mobile SOC. Even the important parameters are environmental
constraints and the design constraints. The key design constraints are area,
speed, and power.
Sketching architecture of any billion gate SOC is one of the difficult
tasks as it involves the real imagination and understanding of the inter-
dependability between the hardware and software. To avoid the overheads
on the single processor, the design may need to have more processors to
perform the multitasking. The architecture document is always evolved
from the design specifications, and it is block-level representation of the
overall design. The team of experienced professional can create such type
of document, and this can be used as reference to sketch the micro-
architecture of the design.
The micro-architecture document is the lower-level abstraction of the
architecture documents, and it gives information about the functionality of
every block with their interface and timing information. At higher level we
can consider this document as sub-block level representation for the block
level design. Even this document should give information about the IPs in
the design their timing and interface details.
The architecture design for SOC and micro-architecture evolution for
SOC is discussed in the next subsequent chapter.
2.2.2 RTL Design and Functional Verification
For the complex SOC designs, the micro-architecture document is used as a
reference by the design team. The billion gate SOC design is partitioned
into multiple blocks and the team of hundreds of engineers work to
implement the design and to perform the verification. RTL design team uses
the recommended design and coding guidelines during the RTL design
phase. An efficient RTL design always plays important role during
implementation cycle. During the RTL design phase, the group members
describes the block-level and top-level functionality using an efficient
Verilog ,SystemVerilog or VHDL constructs.

--- Page 45 ---
After completion of an efficient RTL design phase for the given design
specifications, the design functionality is verified by using industry
standard simulator. Pre-synthesis simulation is without any delays, and
during this, the focus is to verify the functionality of design. But common
practice in the industry is to verify the functionality by writing the
testbenches. The testbench forces the stimulus of signals to the design and
monitors the output from the design. In the present scenario, automation in
the verification flow and new verification methodologies has evolved and
used to verify the complex design functionality in the shorter span of time
using the proper resources. The role of verification engineer is to test the
functional mismatches between the expected output and actual output. If
functional mismatch is found during verification, then it needs to be
rectified before moving to the synthesis step. Functional verification is
iterative process unless and until design meets the required functionality.
For the complex functionality SOC or ASIC verification; the automation
using multiple testbenches and verification planning need to be considered
to achieve the desired coverage goals!
2.2.3 Synthesis and Timing Verification
When the functional requirements of the design are met, the next step is to
perform the block and top level synthesis. Synthesis tool uses the RTL
design, design constraints, and libraries as inputs and generates the gate-
level netlist as an output. Synthesis is iterative process until the design
constraints are met. The primary design constraints are area, speed, and
power. If the design constraints are not met, then the synthesis tool
performs more optimization on the RTL design. After the optimization if it
has observed that the constraints are not met, then it becomes compulsory to
modify RTL code or tweak the micro-architecture. The synthesis tool
generates the area, speed, and power reports and gate-level netlist as an
output.
The timing verification should be carried out for the gate-level netlist,
and this phase is useful to find the pre-synthesis and post-synthesis
simulation mismatches.
The pre-layout timing analysis is also important phase to fix the setup
violations in the design. The hold violations can be fixed during later stage
of the design cycle during post-layout timing analysis.

--- Page 46 ---
2.2.4 Physical Design and Verification
It involves the floorplanning of design, power planning, place and route,
clock tree synthesis, post-layout verification, static timing analysis, and
generation of GDSII for an ASIC design.
2.2.5 Prototype and Test
During this phase, the design prototype using FPGA can be validated and
tested to understand whether the design features are covered or not? This
phase is time-consuming milestone, and before chip fabrication, the
extensive testing needs to be carried out to check for the functionality and
desired outcome.
2.3 SOC Prototyping and Challenges
In the present decade, Xilinx, Intel-FPGA and other vendors have powerful
FPGA architecture and the FPGAs are used for the emulation and
prototyping. The following are few reasons for the use of modern high-
density FPGAs for the prototyping
1. The FPGA with the high-speed architecture can have unmatched
execution performance during emulation and prototyping. 
2. FPGA boards can be used as emulators, so the solutions are cost
effective. If we consider the ASIC, then the commercial testing is very
expensive as compared to FPGA.
 
3. Finding out the desired and required goals using simulation can work
for the small gate count designs, but for the complex designs the robust
verification using application software can be the best choice.
 
4. The emulation and prototyping phase reduces the risk for ASICs as
overall turnaround time is shorter.  
Still in the practical environment, there can be multiple challenges in
the emulation and prototyping using high-density FPGAs. Few of the key
challenges are listed in the following section

--- Page 47 ---
1. Multiple FPGA Architecture: Most of the high-density SOCs need to
be prototyped using multiple FPGA. The architecture of the FPGA is
vendor specific and even the EDA tool support is vendor specific and
may not be effective always. The real quality of the partitioning the
design into multiple FPGA determines the emulation performance.
Another important point is the cost effectiveness and need of the
manpower during the prototyping. Real work needs to be in the area of
efficient design partitioning for the better performance using the
available FPGA interfaces.
 
2. RTL design for ASIC versus FPGA: The RTL coded for the ASIC
does not map easily on the targeted FPGA. The main reasons are
a. There is often difference between the operating frequencies of the
FPGA and ASIC.  
b. The clocking architecture and initialization logic are the real
bottleneck.  
c. IO interfaces and memory technology for the ASIC and FPGA may
have different architecture. Consider the flash which is used in the
ASIC design, but FPGA uses the DRAM.
 
d. The bus models are different for the ASIC and FPGA. If we
compare ASIC versus FPGA, then we can say that no tristate logic
inside FPGA.
 
e. For the ASIC, we need to have the features like debug,
controllability, and observability, and they lack in the FPGA flow.  
So during the RTL design phase, it is always better practice to
describe the RTL design for ASIC as well as FPGA.
 
3. Co-verification and use of IPs: The major challenge is the availability
of the IPs in suitable form. Most of the time, the IPs are not available in
the suitable RTL form. Even to achieve the desired speed, it is
requirement that the FPGA interfaces to the simulators or C/C++ 
models should be design friendly and the availability of such interfaces
 

--- Page 48 ---
having the high bandwidth is real bottleneck. Even there is need to
understand about the custom interfaces and other communication
models for the third-party IPs.
4. IO bottlenecks: The emulation speed is limited due to the available
IOs and interfaces of the FPGA. The real bottleneck due to IO speed is
during the collection of large chunk of data while performing the
functional simulation. Even while applying the stimuli, it is essential to
consider the speed of IOs and interfaces.
 
5. Partitioning: If the SOCs are partitioned in the better way, then also
the communication between the hardware and software using IO
interfaces is the real challenge. Bit-stream generation while
programming the multiple FPGA environments is time-consuming task,
and for the recompilation, it may take hours.
 
6. In-circuit emulation: In-circuit or in-environment emulation is one of
the challenges. Due to the involvement of other system in the
environment, achieving the real-time performance is the bottleneck if
the emulated speed is lesser than the target operational speed. Consider
the real practical scenario where Ethernet needs to work at speed of 100
Mbps then while prototyping if the 100 Mbps Ethernet is clocked at
1/10th of the clock rate then the desired speed can be achieved in the
practical system.
 
7. Clocking and reset network: Another challenge is the clock and reset
network as they are different in the actual system and emulated system. 
2.4 ASIC Prototyping
FPGA is the best candidate for the ASIC or SOC prototyping. ASIC is an
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit, FPGA is field-programmable gate
array, and SOC is System On Chip. During this decade, the density of the
SOC is very higher as compared to the ASIC chips. If we consider this
decade, then the high-density FPGAs from Xilinx and Intel are available
with required features. The main features can be dedicated memory
controllers, high-speed processor cores, high-speed bus interfaces, etc. The
main objective of the prototype team is to validate the firmware, software,

--- Page 49 ---
and hardware of SOC using high-density FPGAs. ASIC prototyping is
useful to reduce the delivery time, budget, and the market targets. For high-
density SOC designs, the proof of concept in lesser time and cost can be
targeted by using the FPGAs.
As the process node shrunk to 14 nanometers, the complexity of design,
the design risk, and the development time have increased. The main
challenge for every organization is to develop the lower-cost products with
more functionality in small silicon area. In such scenario, the designers are
facing the development and verification challenges. Under such
circumstances, the high-end FPGAs can be used to prototype the ASIC
functionality and it reduces the overall risk. The functionally verified and
 completely tested design on high-end FPGAs can be resynthesized for
the standard cell ASIC by using the same RTL, constraints, and scripts.
There are many EDA tools available to port an FPGA prototype on
structured ASICs. This really reduces the overall risk in ASIC design and
saves money and time to market for the product.
The following are key advantages of ASIC prototyping using FPGAs
1. Investments: The shrinking process node and chip geometries involve
the investment in millions of dollars in the early stage of design. Using
FPGAs, the investment risk reduces.
 
2. Risks: Due to uncontrolled market conditions, there is risk involved in
the design and development of products. FPGA prototype reduces such
risk as the product specifications, and design can be validated
depending on the functional requirements or changes.
 
3. Ease to test: FPGA prototyping is efficient as the bugs those were not
detected in simulation can be addressed and covered during
prototyping.
 
4. System testing and verification: Full-system verification using FPGA
prototype can detect the functional bugs in the early design cycle. 
5. Manufacturing cost: FPGA prototyping saves the millions of dollar of
EDA tool cost and even it saves the millions of dollar of engineering
efforts before ASIC tape-out.
 

--- Page 50 ---
6. Time to market: As design using FPGA can be migrated using the
EDA tool chains onto the ASICs, it saves the time to market the product
with intended functionality.
 
7. IP validation and integration: Multiple IPs can be integrated, and
design functionality can be verified and tested and that can speed up the
design cycle.
 
8. Design partitioning: Most of the cases, the hardware–software
portioning is visualized at higher abstraction level. The hardware
software co-design can be evaluated at the hardware level, and it is
more important milestone in overall design cycle. So the ASIC
prototyping can be useful in tweaking of the architecture. If there is
additional design overhead in the hardware, then the design architecture
can be changed by pushing few blocks in software and vice versa. This
will give the more efficient SOC architecture and design.
 
Table 2.1 gives information about the pros and cons of FPGA and ASIC.
Table 2.1Comparison of FPGA vs ASIC implementation
 FPGA Hard copy Structured ASIC Standard cell
ASIC
NRE, mask,
and EDA
tools
Up to a few
thousand
US$, so the
overall cost
is low
Couple of hundred
thousand US$ for
FPGA conversion
and masks. So the
overall cost is
moderate
A couple of hundred
thousand US$ for
interconnect/metal one
masks so the overall cost
is moderate
A million US$
depending on the
design
functionality. So the
cost is high
Unit price High Medium–low Medium–low Low
Time to
volume
Immediate Almost around 8–
10 weeks. The
additional
conversion time
may require for
other structured
ASIC products
Almost around 8–
10 weeks. The additional
conversion time may
require for other
structured ASIC products
Almost around
18 weeks + 
conversion time of
another 18 weeks
Engineering
resources
and cost
Minimum Minimal from
developers but
other structured
products may
require the
additional
Nominal but for the other
structured ASIC products
may require the additional
engagement of the
resources
High as most of the
work requires the
development from
scratch and requires

--- Page 51 ---
 FPGA Hard copy Structured ASIC Standard cell
ASIC
engineering
resources
good support from
backend team
FPGA
prototype
correlation
Same deviceFor hard copy
structured ASIC:
nearly identical,
same logic
elements, process,
analog
components, and
packages
It depends upon the type
of IP used and the
functionality. Same RTL
but potentially different
libraries, process, analog,
and packages
Same RTL but
potentially different
libraries, process,
analog, and
packages
There is always confusion between the prototype and migration. The
ASIC prototyping is basically the design or validation of idea to check for
the early functional and feasibility of product idea or design. The design
migration from ASIC to FPGA involves the flow from RTL design to
implementation and may be useful in the upgradation of design with
additional features.
The following are the important points need to be considered during
ASIC prototyping and design migration using high-end FPGA.
1. Prototype boards: Use the universal prototype board as it saves the
time of almost four months to twelve months for the high-speed
prototyping board design and development.
 
2. FPGA selection: Choose the FPGA device depending on the
functionality and gate count. It is not possible to fit whole ASIC onto
single FPGA fabric even if we use the high-end families of Altera or
Xilinx FPGAs. So the practical solution is the use of multiple FPGAs.
But the real issue is the design partitioning and the inter-
communication between multiple FPGAs. If the design is well defined
and partitioned properly, then the manual partitioning into multiple
FPGA can give the efficient results. If the design is big and has
complex functionality, then the use of automatic partitioning can play
important role and can create the efficient prototype.
 
3. ASIC versus FPGA resources: As the design library for ASIC and
FPGA is totally different, the key challenge is to map the primitives. So
it is essential to map the directly instantiated primitives during
synthesis or during the implementation level that is post-synthesis, all
 

--- Page 52 ---
the primitives from ASIC library need to be remapped for getting the
FPGA prototype.
4. Required IOs: High-end FPGA may have 1000–1500 pins, and if
single FPGA is used for prototype, then there is no any issue. But if IO
pins required more than the pins available in one FPGA, then the real
issue is due to FPGA interfaces and connectivity. The issue can be
resolved by using the partitioning with the signal and IO multiplexing.
This will ensure the efficient design partitioning and efficient design
prototype.
 
5. Single versus multiple clock domain designs: Implementation of
single clock domain design prototype is easy using FPGAs. But if the
design has more than one clock that is multiple clock domains, then it
is quite challenging to use the clock gating and other clock generation
techniques during prototype. So the migration of ASIC design into
FPGA needs more efforts and sophisticated solutions. One of the
efficient solutions is to convert the designs into smaller design units
clocked by the global clock source.
 
6. Memory requirements and models: The memory models used in the
FPGA are different as compared to ASIC. So it is essential to use the
proper strategy during memory mapping. Most of the time, the
synthesized memory models required are not available. Under such
scenario, the best possible solution is to use the prototyping board with
the required specific memory device.
 
7. Functional Test and Debug: The full functional testing and debugging
are one of the main challenges in the ASIC prototyping. During this
phase, it is essential to use the debugging platform which can give the
visibility of the results like speed and functional testing results.
 
The ASIC prototyping is achieved by using industry standard leading
tools like Design Compiler FPGA. The EDA tool is available for ASIC
prototyping using high-end FPGA. The design compiler is industries
leading EDA tool use to get best optimal synthesis result and best timing for
the FPGA synthesis. The basic flow for the ASIC prototyping is shown in
Fig. 2.3, and in the subsequent chapters, we will discuss the ASIC
prototyping key steps and how we can achieve the efficient ASIC prototype.

--- Page 53 ---
Fig. 2.3ASIC prototype flow
2.5 Important Design Compiler (DC) Commands
Few of the important DC commands are used during the compilation and
optimization and documented in this section (Table 2.2).
Table 2.2Important design compiler commands [1]

--- Page 54 ---
Command Description
read-format <format_type> <filename> Read the design
analyze–format <format_type> <list of file
names>
Analyze the design for the syntax errors and
translation before building the generic logic
elaborate–format <list of module names> Used to elaborate the design
check_design To check the design problems like shorts, open,
multiple connection, instantiations with no
connections
create_clock–name <clock_name>-period
<clock_eriod> <clock_pin_names>
Create the clock for the design
set_clock_skew–rise_delay
<rising_clock_skew> <clock_name>
Define the clock skew for the design
set_input_delay–clock <clock_names>
<input_delay> <input_port>
To set the input port delay
set_output_delay–clock <clock_names>
<output_delay> <output_port>
To set the output port delay
compile–map_effort <map_effort_level> To compile with the low, medium, or high map effort
level
write–format <format_type> output
<file_name>
To save the output generated by the synthesis tool
set_false_path–from [get_ports <port list>]–
to get_ports <port list>]
To set the false path
set_multicycle_path– setup <period>-from
[get_cells]–to [get_cells[
To push the setup for the design having multicycle
path
set_multicycle_path–hold <period>-from
[get_cells]–to [get_cells[
To push the hold for the design having multicycle
path
set_clock_uncertanity To define the estimated network skew
set_clock_latency To define the estimated source and network latency
set_clock_transition Define the estimated clock skew
set_dont_touch Used to prevent the optimization of the mapped
gates
2.6 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
1. ASIC and SOC prototype can be achieved by using the high
density FPGAs. In the present decade, the FPGAs are widely used for
prototyping and emulation.
 

--- Page 55 ---
2. The main objective of FPGA prototyping is to have quick turnaround of
ideas with lesser cost.  
3. The high-end FPGAs from Xilinx, Intel-FPGA consist of the processor
cores, memory controllers and other high-speed interfaces and can be
used for the SOC prototype.
 
4. The design specifications and architecture of SOC play important role
during ASIC, SOC design, and prototyping.  
5. The SOC architecture should support high-speed interfaces,
multiprocessing, and IOs with high bandwidth.  
6. The SOC prototype team can use the functional and timing proven IPs
during SOC design and prototype.  
7. The ASIC and FPGA netlist differ in many ways, and during SOC
prototype, it is essential to have FPGA equivalent of memories, gated
clocks, and other custom logic.
 
This chapter has given us understanding of the basics of SOC
architecture, SOC design flow, and challenges during protoype. The next
chapter will focus on the RTL design using VHDL and frequently
used RTL design guidelines.
Reference
1. www. synopsys. com.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 56 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_3
3. Design Using VHDL and Guidelines
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“For efficient design the design team members should follow the
design guidelines.”
Abstract
The main focus of this chapter is to have discussion on the important design
guidelines which need to be followed during the RTL design cycle. Every
organization has  their own standards and guidelines and should be used
during the design cycle for the efficient design outcome. In such scenario,
the chapter describes the dos and don’ts during RTL design, VHDL
important design constructs, and the logic inferred using the RTL
schematic.
KeywordsRTL – VHDL – If-then-else – Case – Nested if-then-else –
Process – Sensitivity list – Empty sensitivity – Grouping – Parallel logic –
Priority logic – Multiple clock domain designs – Level synchronizer –
Resource sharing – Clock gating – Clock enables – Synthesis
3.1 RTL Design Guidelines
Following are the guidelines used during the RTL design cycle

--- Page 57 ---
1. Avoid the combinational loops in the design.  
2. To avoid the simulation and synthesis mismatches, use complete list
of required inputs, temporary variables and signals while using
process block. In simple words use the complete sensitivity list while
using the procedural blocks!
 
3. Remove the potential unintentional latches by using the ‘when others’
in the case construct or by using all the case conditions in the case
constructs.
 
4. Try to cover all the else conditions as missing else can infer the
latches in the design.  
5. If the intention is to design the priority logic, then use the nested if-
then-else construct.  
6. To infer the parallel logic, use the case construct.  
7. To avoid the glitches in the design, use the one-hot encoding FSMs. 
8. Do not implement the FSM with the combination of the latches and
registers.  
9. Initialize unused FSM states using reset or by using the when others. 
10.Use the  seperate process block for the next state, state register, and
output logic.  
11. For Moore machines, use process (current_state) for the output logic
block, and for the mealy machine, use the process (current_state,
inputs) for the output logic.
 
12.Do not make the assignments to the same variable or output in the
multiple process blocks.  
13.Use the separate process block for the each functional modules
triggered on the different clocks.  

--- Page 58 ---
14.Create the separate design for the multiflop level or pulse
synchronizer and instantiate them while passing the data between two
clock domains.
 
15.Try to have the RTL design vendor independent by using the
inference.  
3.2 RTL Design Practical Scenarios
The following section discusses the important RTL design scenarios and the
RTL tweaks to improve the performance of the design. Few of the
techniques like grouping and resource sharing are discussed in this chapter.
For more details about the performance improvement at RTL and synthesis
stage, refer to the next few chapters.
3.2.1 Incomplete Sensitivity List
The incomplete sensitivity list infers the unintentional latches. The
synthesis tool ignores the sensitivity list and infers the combinational logic
as XOR gate for the Examples 1, 2, 3.
Example 1: VHDL Description Using Complete Sensitivity List
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity comb_logic is 
port ( a_in, b_in : in std_logic;
        y_out : out std_logic);
end comb_logic;
architecture arch_comb_logic of comb_logic is
begin

--- Page 59 ---
            -- process sensitive to inputs a_in  and b_in
                process ( a_in, b_in)
                begin
                           y_out <= a_in  xor b_in;
                end process;
end arch_comb_logic;
Consider the Example 2; in this one of the required input ‘b_in’ is missing
 from the sensitivity list and under such circumstances, there will be a
mismatch between the pre-synthesis and post-synthesis simulation.
Example 2: VHDL Description with the Incomplete Sensitivity
List
architecture arch_comb_logic of comb_logic is
begin
             -- process sensitive to inputs a_in  and b_in
                 process ( a_in )
                 begin
                            y_out <= a_in  xor b_in;
                 end process;
end arch_comb_logic;
If the sensitivity list is empty, then the process block is locked during
simulation and it is like infinite looping. The synthesis tool infers the
combinational logic XOR gate.
Example 3: VHDL Description with the Empty Sensitivity List
architecture arch_comb_logic of comb_logic is
begin
            -- process without any sensitivity list
                process 

--- Page 60 ---
                begin
                           y_out <= a_in  xor b_in;
                end process;
end arch_comb_logic;
3.2.2 Case Versus If-then-else
The important sequential constructs are ‘case’ and ‘if-then-else’ and used to
infer the parallel logic and priority design respectively. These constructs are
used in the procedural block process. Most of the time, the data path logic
that is combinational logic in the register to register path decides about the
timing of the overall design. Depending on the scenario, the designer can
use the ‘case’ construct or ‘if-then-else’ construct to infer the required
intended logic.
Consider the VHDL code of 4:1 MUX (Example 4) using ‘case’
 construct, the case construct is used inside the process, and as all the inputs
have same priority, it infers the parallel logic.
Example 4: VHDL Description Using ‘Case-end case’
--VHDL code for 4:1 MUX
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
entity mux_4to1 is
port ( d_in : in std_logic_vector (3 downto 0);
        sel_in : in std_logic_vector (1 downto 0);
      q_out : out std_logic);
end mux_4to1;
                           -- Functionality description using case
architecture arch_mux_4to1  of mux_4to1 is 
begin
--process sensitive to data input and select input
              process ( d_in, sel_in)
              begin
              case (sel_in) is 

--- Page 61 ---
                            when “00” => q_out <= d_in(0);
                            when “01” => q_out <= d_in(1);
                            when “10” => q_out <= d_in(2);
                            when others  => q_out <= d_in(3);
              end case;
              end process;
end arch_mux_4to1;
The synthesis outcome is shown in Fig. 3.1 and as shown it infers 4:1 MUX
with 4 input lines and single output line. The select inputs are used to
control the data flow from one of the multiplexer input to output.
Multiplexer is univeral logic and is called as many to one switch.
Multiplexers are extensively used in the IO multiplexing schemes!
Fig. 3.1Synthesis result of 4:1 MUX using case [1]
The 4:1 MUX using the nested if-then-else is described in Example 5.
Due to the use of the if-then-else sequential statement it infers the priority
logic.
Synthesis outcome is shown (Fig. 3.2) and the input d_in(0) has the
highest priority, and d_in(3) has lowest priority. The priority logic  of 4:1
MUX has additional logic to perform the decoding. As shown, the decoding
logic controls the data transfer from the cascade chain of 2:1 multiplexer
(Fig. 3.2).

--- Page 62 ---
Fig. 3.2Synthesis result of 4:1 MUX using nested if-then-else
Example 5: VHDL Description Using Nested If-then-else
-- VHDL code for priority 4:1 MUX
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
entity mux_4to_priority is
port ( d_in : in std_logic_vector (3 downto 0);
        sel_in : in std_logic_vector (1 downto 0);
      q_out : out std_logic);
end mux_4to1_priority;
--Functional description using nested if-then-else
architecture arch_mux_4to1_priority  of mux_4to1_priority is 
begin
--Process sensitive to data and select input 
process ( d_in, sel_in)
begin

--- Page 63 ---
             if (sel_in=“00”) then
                        q_out <= d_in(0);
             elsif (sel_in=“01”) then
                        q_out <= d_in(1);
             elsif (sel_in=“10”) then
                        q_out <= d_in(2);
             else
                        q_out <= d_in(3);
             end if;
end process;
end arch_mux_4to1_priority; 
3.3 Grouping the Terms
To improve the design performance, the grouping of terms can be used.
This can be accomplished by using parenthesis. Consider Example 6 shown
below. In this example, the result of (a_in + b_in − c_in-d_in) is assigned to
y_out. Without the grouping, the synthesis tool results in the cascaded
network of the arithmetic logic elements.
Example 6: VHDL Description Without Grouping the Terms
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity without_grouping is 
port ( a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in : in std_logic_vector(1 downto 0);
        y_out : out std_logic_vector(1 downto 0) );
end without_grouping;
architecture arch_without_gropuing of without_grouping is

--- Page 64 ---
begin
--Assignment without using the grouping of terms
   y_out <= a_in + b_in -c_in -d_in;
end arch_without_gropuing;
The synthesis result is shown in Fig. 3.3, and as shown the logic has three
 combinational elements and they are connected in cascade. In the simple
words, it is combinational logic and the overall delay is n*tpd. Where
n = number of combinational elements and tpd = propagation delay of the
element.
Fig. 3.3Synthesis result of the VHDL description without grouping of terms [1]
The RTL description in Example 6 can be modified by the use of
the parenthesis. The modified code is shown in Example 7 and it uses the
expression as y_out = (a_in + b_in) − (c_in + d_in).
Example 7: VHDL Description Using Grouping of the Terms
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity with_grouping is 
port ( a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in : in std_logic_vector(1 downto 0);
        y_out : out std_logic_vector(1 downto 0) );

--- Page 65 ---
end with_grouping;
architecture arch_with_gropuing of with_grouping is
begin
             --Assignment using the grouping of terms
y_out <= (a_in + b_in) −(c_in + d_in) ;
end arch_with_gropuing;
The synthesis result is shown in Fig. 3.4 and it infers the parallel logic at the
input side due to use of the parenthesis. Due to use of the parenthesis, it
infers two adders and one subtractor during synthesis. The subtraction
operation can be implemented using 2s complement addition. If the delay of
every  element is 1 ns, then the overall propagation delay is 2 ns. This
technique is used to improve the design performance.
Fig. 3.4Synthesis result for VHDL code using grouping of the terms
3.4 Tristate Buses and Logic
The tristate has three values logic ‘0’, logic ‘1’, and high impedance ‘z’.
The tristate buses are used to communicate with the other design modules.
More information about the buses and interfaces is discussed in  subsequent
chapters. The Example 8 describes the tristate logic. It is recommended to
use the tristate logic at the top of the design to avoid the bus contentions.

--- Page 66 ---
Instead of using the tristate logic, it is better idea to use the MUX-based
logic with the enable.
Example 8: VHDL Description for Tristate Logic
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity tri_state is 
port ( a_in, enable_in : in std_logic;
         y_out : out std_logic);
end tri_state;
--Tristate bus logic description using if-then-else
architecture arch_tri_state of tri_state is
begin
--Process to define the output as high impedance for enable_in=‘0’
process ( a_in, enable_in)
            begin
            if ( enable_in=‘1’) then
                       y_out <= a_in;
            else
                       y_out <=‘Z’;
end if; 

--- Page 67 ---
end process;
end arch_tri_state;
Figure 3.5 shows the synthesis result for the tristate logic and the logic can
be used to pass the data when ‘enable_in’ is equal to logic ‘1’. For logic ‘0’
enable input, the output of tristate logic is high impedance that is potential
free contact.
Fig. 3.5Synthesis result for the tristate logic [1]
3.5 Resource Sharing
In most of the practical design scenarios, the common resources can be
shared by using the fundamental concepts of logic design. For example, if
adders are used and consuming the more area, then the area can be reduced
by sharing the common adder as resource. This technique plays an
important role in the area reduction and hence optimizes the design for the
required gate counts. Instead of using more number of adders, it is better
practice to use more number of multiplexers in the design. Consider the
VHDL code described in Example 9 for the truth Table 3.1: Truth table for
the arithmetic operations. As described in the VHDL code the output needs
to be assigned depending on the condition of the select input. For
‘sel_in = 1,’ the output ‘y_out’ is assigned to ‘a_in + b_in,’ and for the
‘sel_in = 0,’ an output ‘y_out’ is assigned to ‘c_in + d_in’.
Table 3.1Truth table for the arithmetic operations
sel_iny_out
0 c_in + d_in
1 a_in + b_in

--- Page 68 ---
Example 9: VHDL Description to Perform Addition Without
Resource Sharing
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity resource_sharing is
port (a_in,b_in,c_in,d_in: in std_logic_vector (1 downto 0);
sel_in: in std_logic;
y_out: out std_logic_vector ( 1 downto 0));
end resource_sharing;
--Functional description without pushing the common resources 
architecture arch_without_sharing of resource_sharing is
begin
--Process sensitive to all the inputs and control signals
process (a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in, sel_in)
begin
            if (sel_in=‘1’) then
                         y_out <= a_in +  b_in;
            else
                         y_out <= c_in +  d_in;
            end if;
end process; 
end arch_without_sharing;
The synthesis result for the arithmetic logic without using the concept of
resource sharing is shown in Fig. 3.6. As shown in Fig. 3.6, the logic infers
two adders and single multiplexer. The adders are used in the data path to
perform the addition. The output of multiplexer is controlled by ‘sel_in’
input; and for the ‘sel_in’ input as logic ‘1’, it generates an output which is

--- Page 69 ---
addition of ‘a_in’, ‘b_in’. For the logic ‘0’ condition of ‘sel_in’, it generates
an output as addition of ‘c_in’, ‘d_in’.
Fig. 3.6Synthesis result for the VHDL description without sharing of common resources [1]
The generated logic has issue, as both adders are performing operations
at the same time; so unnecessary it is wastage of power and even more area.
The data after performing the additions waits at the input lines of
multiplexers and depending on the status of select line the output is
assigned. So this kind of technique is less efficient and has more gate count
and has more power dissipation. To overcome this limitation, the resource
sharing is used where the common resource is shared by pushing the adder
forward to the multiplexers. So using resource sharing, more multiplexers
are used and less number of adders.
As discussed earlier, the common resource adder can be shared by
pushing the multiplexer chain at the input and by using the adder at the
output. The Table 3.2: Truth Table for the arithmetic operations to get
resource sharing; gives information about the strategy used for sharing the
common resources.
Table 3.2Truth table for the arithmetic operations to get resource sharing
sel_insig_1Sig_2y_out
0 c_in d_in c_in + d_in
1 a_in b_in a_in + b_in
By  tweaking the code, the resource sharing can be achieved. The
modified RTL code is described in the Example 10 and uses the temporary
signals as ‘sig_1’ and ‘sig_2’. For logic ‘0’ status on the select line ‘sel_in,’
the ‘sig_1’ holds the ‘c_in’ input, and ‘sig_2’ holds the ‘d_in’ input value.

--- Page 70 ---
For logic ‘1’ status on the select line ‘sel_in,’ the ‘sig_1’ holds the ‘a_in’
input, and ‘sig_2’ holds the ‘b_in’ input value.
Example 10: VHDL Description to Push Common Resources at
Output [1]
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity resource_sharing  is
port (a_in,b_in,c_in,d_in: in std_logic_vector (1 downto 0);
sel_in: in std_logic;
y_out: out std_logic_vector ( 1 downto 0));
end resource_sharing;
--The functional description using sharing of common resources 
architecture arch_with_sharing of resource_sharing is
signal sig_1, sig_2 : std_logic_vector (1 downto 0);
begin
--The process to assign the intermediate signals to required inputs
               P1: process (a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in, sel_in)
               begin
                           if (sel_in=‘1’) then
                                         sig_1 <= a_in ;
                                         sig_2 <= b_in;
                           else
                                         sig_1 <= c_in ;
                                         sig_2<= d_in;
                           end if;
               end process; 
--The process to get the output from common resource adder

--- Page 71 ---
               P2: process ( sig_1, sig_2)
               begin
                           y_out <= sig_1 + sig_2;
               end process;
end arch_with_sharing;
The synthesis result for Example 10 is shown in Fig. 3.7. As shown in the
figure, the logic is realized by using the single adder and two multiplexers.
As one adder consumes lesser area, the design is efficient and has less gate
count and lesser power. In this design, only one operation is performed at a
time.
Fig. 3.7Synthesis result for the VHDL description using concept of resource sharing [1]
3.6 Level Synchronizer
The complex ASIC designs or design using FPGA can have single or
multiple clock domains. A single clock domain design does not have the
issue of data integrity or data convergence. But if the design has multiple
clocks, then the real issue is during the data passing from one of the clock
domain to another clock domain. To avoid the metastability and the data
integrity issues, the single bit data or control signals can be passed from
clock domain I to clock domain II by using the two stages or multistage
level synchronizers.

--- Page 72 ---
Example 11 describes the multiple clock domain design scenario. But in
the practice, there can be separate design for clock domain I and clock
domain II. Instantiate the synchronizer block while passing data from clock
domain one to clock domain two.
Example 11: VHDL Description for the Level Synchronizer
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
entity clock_domain_crossing is 
port ( a_in , b_in , clk_1, clk_2 : in std_logic;
       y_out : out std_logic);
end clock_domain_crossing;
architecture arch_mult_clock of clock_domain_crossing is
signal sig_domain_1 , sig_domain_2 : std_logic;
begin
--The process sensitive to clock domain I
              P1: process (clk_1)
              begin
                            if rising_edge (clk_1) then
                                         sig_domain_1 <= a_in and b_in;
                            end if;
              end process;
--The process sensitive to clock domain II

--- Page 73 ---
              P2: process (clk_2)
              begin
                            if rising_edge (clk_2) then
                                         sig_domain_2 <= sig_domain_1;
                                         y_out <= sig_domain_2;
                            end if;
              end process;
end arch_mult_clock;
The synthesis result is shown in Fig. 3.8 and as shown while passing the
data from clock domain I to the clock domain II; two-level synchronizer is
used. This type of synchronizer is also called as multi-flop synchronizer.
The two-level synchronizer output is a valid legal state although the first
flip-flop in the second clock domain goes into the metastable state.
Fig. 3.8Synthesis result for the VHDL description using multiple clocks [1]
3.7 Gated Clocks
The clock is a hungry net in the design. Due to clock toggling, the design
has more dynamic power dissipation. The power dissipation can be reduced
by using the clock gating cells. The design using the clock gating concept is
described in the Example 12. The synthesis result is shown in Fig. 3.9.

--- Page 74 ---
Fig. 3.9Synthesis result for VHDL description using clock gating [1]
Example 12: VHDL Description for Gated Clock
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity gated_clock is
port (data_in, clk, load_en, clock_en: in std_logic;
y_out: out std_logic);
end gated_clock;
architecture arch_gated_clock of gated_clock is
signal clock_gate: std_logic;
begin
            clock_gate <= (clk and clock_en);
--The process sensitive to load and clock gate input 
process (load_en, clock_gate)
begin
            if (clock_gate=‘1’ and clock_gate’event) then
                         if (load_en=‘1’) then
                                      y_out <= data_in;
                         end if; 
            end if;
end process; 

--- Page 75 ---
end arch_gated_clock;
As shown in the synthesis outcome, the clock input of the register is
controlled by using the ‘clock_gate’. Where ‘clock_gate’ signal is generated
by using AND logic. But such type of gating strategy is prone to the
glitches. To avoid the glitches, it is recommended to use the clock gating
cells. To infer the clock gating, use the vendor-specific EDA tool directives.
The ASIC clock gating may not be functional equivalent to the FPGA clock
gating strategies. In such kind of scenarios, the tweaking of the RTL is
mandatory or use the clock gating conversion while realizing the design
using FPGA. The clock gating conversions and tweaking are discussed in
much more details in next few chapters.
3.8 Clock Enables
The sequential design can have an additional enable signal. Depending on
the enable signal status, the input data can be transferred to the output.
Example 13 describes the VHDL RTL having the enable input, and the
synthesis result is shown in Fig. 3.10.
Fig. 3.10Synthesis result for the VHDL description using clock enable
Example 13: VHDL Description Using Clock Enable
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity clock_enable is

--- Page 76 ---
port (data_in, clk, load_en, clock_en: in std_logic;
y_out: out std_logic);
end clock_enable;
architecture arch_clock_enable of clock_enable is
signal clock_enable : std_logic; 
begin
clock_enable <= load_en and clock_en; 
--The process sensitive to clock, enable and data input 
process (clk, data_in, clock_enable)
begin
             if (clk=‘1’ and clk’event) then
                          if (clock_enable=‘1’) then
                                       y_out <= data_in;
                          end if;
             end if;
end process; 
end arch_clock_enable;
As shown in the synthesis outcome, the clock enable logic is generated and
used in the enable path of the flip-flop.
More guidelines related to the practical scenarios during SOC
prototyping phase and their interpretation will be discussed in few of the
next chapters.
3.9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
1 Every organization has their own guidelines and naming conventions. 
2 During the RTL design cycle, use the naming conventions and design
guidelines.  
3 To avoid the simulation and synthesis mismatch, use complete
sensitivity list.  

--- Page 77 ---
4 Do not use ‘Buffer’ as during synthesis it creates the problem. Use
‘inout’ with the suitable intermediate signal for looping back of the
signals.
 
5 Use the ‘case’ construct for the parallel logic and use ‘if-then-else’
construct for the priority logic.  
6 For better timing and constraining design, use the registered input and
registered output.  
7 Do not use the glue logic between different modules, instead of that
combine the glue logic in the required design.  
8 Use pipelining for the improved design performance. 
9 Use more number of multiplexers as compare to adder. Adder
consumes more area as compared to the multiplexers. 
10Use tristate logic at the top level or model the tristate behavior using
the suitable multiplexing logic with enable input.  
11 Use the grouping of the terms using parenthesis to reduce the overall
propagation delay.  
12Describe all the conditions in the ‘case’ construct and cover all the else
conditions while using the ‘if-then-else’ construct to avoid inference of
the unintentional latches.
 
13Latches are inferred in the design if ‘else’ condition is not covered.
Even if all the conditions in the ‘case’ construct are not covered then it
infers unintentional latches.
 
14Use the two or multilevel synchronizer to pass the data from one of the
clock domain to another clock domain.  
15Use the logic duplication technique to improve the overall design
performance. Depending on the scenario logic duplication can increase
the gate count or can reduce the gate count.
 

--- Page 78 ---
16Have clean data and control paths in the design. Try to push the late
arrival signal forward as compared to early arrival signals. This will
have better timing and can be used to eliminate the setup time
violations.
 
17Use gated clock for the low power dissipation. Use the dedicated clock
gating cell.  
This chapter has given us good understanding about the design
guidelines and use of the important VHDL constructs. The next chapter
describes about the RTL design using VHDL for frequently used designs.
Even the chapter discusses about the important VHDL constructs and
their use during the design for efficient logic synthesis.
Reference
1. www. xilinx. com.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 79 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototypinghttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_4
4. VHDL Design Scenarios and Synthesis
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra, India
 
Vaibbhav TaraateEmail: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“it is always better to choose the efficient constructs which can yield into thedesired optimum logic.”
AbstractThe chapter describes the few important RTL design scenarios which can encounter duringthe design phase. Most of the time to get the desired synthesis outcome, we should bethoughtful to choose the required constructs. The goal of the RTL designer is to perceivethe design outcome at the lower level of abstraction. The area, speed, and powerconstraints are used during synthesis stage. In such context, the chapter discusses fewimportant design scenarios.
KeywordsRTL – VHDL – If-then-else – Case – Process – ASIC synthesis – FPGAsynthesis – Multipliers – Pipelining – Multiple clock domain designs – Gray counters –Binary counters – Resource utilization – Resource sharing – Clock gating – Registerbalancing – Logic duplication
4.1 Multiple Clock Domain and Code Converters
4.1.1 Binary to Gray Code Converter
In two of the successive binary numbers, multiple bits can change, but in the twosuccessive gray numbers, only single bit changes. So during the design of multiple clockdomain designs most of the time, we use the gray pointers and counters. Imagine ascenario where the data need to pass from the clock domain I to clock domain II, in suchkind of designs the gray pointers can be used. The design uses the binary to gray codeconverters and gray to binary code converters.The Example 1 VHDL code is a description of the 4-bit binary to gray code converter.
Example 1: VHDL Description for Binary to Gray Code Converter

--- Page 80 ---
library IEEE;
use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
-- port definition for the binary to gray code converter
entity binarytogray is
    Port ( binary_data : in std_logic_vector(3 downto 0);
           gray_data : out std_logic_vector(3 downto 0) );
end binarytogray;
-- functionality definition for the binary to gray code converter
architecture Behavioral of binarytogray is
begin
   gray_data(3)<= binary_data(3);
   gray_data(2)<= binary_data(3) xor binary_data(2);
   gray_data(1)<= binary_data(2) xor binary_data(1);
   gray_data(0)<= binary_data(1) xor binary_data(0);
end Behavioral;
The synthesis outcome of the 4-bit binary to gray code converter is shown in Fig. 4.1. Asshown, it uses binary data as input and generates the gray data as output. For bettersynthesis outcome, the RTL designer can implement the code converters as a separatedesign and can instantiate this whenever required.
Fig. 4.1Four-bit binary to gray code converter [1]
4.1.2 Gray to Binary Code Converter
The main application of the gray to binary code converter is to get back the binary data.The 4-bit gray to binary code converter using VHDL constructs is described in Example 2.

--- Page 81 ---
Example 2: VHDL Description for Gray to Binary Code Converter
library IEEE;
use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
--pin description for the gray to binary code converter 
entity graytobinary is
    Port ( gray_data : in std_logic_vector ( 3 downto 0);
           binary_data : out std_logic_vector ( 3 downto 0) );
end graytobinary;
-- functional description for the four-bit gray to binary code converter
architecture arch_graytobinary of graytobinary is
signal tmp_binary_data : std_logic_vector ( 3 downto 0);
begin
   tmp_binary_data(3) <= gray_data(3);
   tmp_binary_data(2) <= gray_data(3) xor gray_data(2);
   tmp_binary_data(1) <= tmp_binary_data(2) xor gray_data(1);
   tmp_binary_data(0) <= tmp_binary_data(1) xor gray_data(0);   
   binary_data <= tmp_binary_data;
end arch_graytobinary;
The synthesis result of the 4-bit gray to binary converter is shown in Fig. 4.2.
Fig. 4.2Four-bit gray to binary code converter [1]
4.2 Synthesis for Multiple Architecture

--- Page 82 ---
The VHDL description should have a single entity but can support single or multiplearchitecture. Architecture is used to describe functionality of the design and multiplearchitectures will execute in parallel. If the configuration construct is not used in the RTLdesign, then the last architecture described in the VHDL description will be coupled withentity. The synthesis tool will infer the logic depending on the functionality described inthe last architecture.During the RTL design stage most of the time, we need to explore differentpossibilities to describe the design functionality. For example, use of ‘if-then-else’ and‘case-end case’ for the same design functionality. In such circumstances instead of havingtwo different RTL designs, it is better that we can have multiple architecture. Dependingon the requirement, one of the architecture can be chosen using the ‘configuration’construct.
Example 3: VHDL Description Using Multiple Architecture
--multiple architecture definitions and configuration 
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
--
Entity description for the design. It describes the input and output ports depending on the design specification
entity multiple_architecture is
     port ( s_in : in std_logic;
                a_in  : in std_logic;
                b_in  : in std_logic;
                y_out : out std_logic);
end multiple_architecture;
--Architecture definition which is functional description for the design 
architecture arch_design_1 of multiple_architecture is
begin
      y_out <= a_in xor b_in xor s_in;
end arch_design_1;
--Architecture definition for the design
architecture arch_design of multiple_architecture is
begin
      y_out <= a_in and b_in and s_in;
end arch_design;
--To select the required functionality, the configuration construct is described below
configuration conf_arch1 of multiple_architecture is

--- Page 83 ---
     For arch_design_1
    End For;
end conf_arch1;
As described in Example 3, the ‘arch_design_1’ is chosen to infer the XOR logic. Ifconfiguration is not used then the last architecture will be coupled with entiy to infer thelogic. The synthesis outcome is shown in Fig. 4.3.
Fig. 4.3Logic inferred for the multiple architecture design [1]
4.3 Signal Definition and Synthesis
Signals are intermediate wires used for the connection of the different instances.The Table 4.1 gives few important highlights for the signal assignments.
Table 4.1Important points related to signal assignments
Signals are global to the architecture
Signals are updated when the process execution suspends that is at the end of the process
In the signal assignment, delay can be specified
To the same signal inside the process, if multiple assignments are used, then the last assignment is effective
The VHDL description which uses the signal assignments is shown in Example 4. Asdescribed, the ‘signal_1, signal_2’ are used to establish the intermediate connectionsbetween logic gates or cells. The ‘signal_2’ is updated at the end of the process to infer thelogic (Fig. 4.4).
Fig. 4.4Logic inferred using the signal assignments [1]

--- Page 84 ---
Example 4: VHDL Description Using Signal Assignments
--signal assignments
 library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity signal_assignment is 
port ( a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in, e_in : in std_logic;
       y1_out , y2_out : out std_logic);
end signal_assignment;
architecture arch_signal of signal_assignment is
signal signal_1, signal_2 : std_logic;
begin
                signal_1 <= a_in xor b_in; 
                process ( c_in, signal_1, signal_2) 
                begin
                     y1_out <= not signal_2;
                     signal_2 <= signal_1 xor c_in;
                end process ; 
  y2_out <= not (e_in xor d_in );
end arch_signal;
4.4 Variable Assignment and Synthesis
The variables are local to the process and when used they update instant immediately.During RTL design, it is essential to choose from signals and variables. Table 4.2 givesinformation about important highlights regarding the variable assignments.
Table 4.2Important points related to variable assignments
Variable are local to the process
Variables are updated instant immediately and the event is not scheduled
Variable assignments cannot be delayed
Many assignments to the same variable are effective
The VHDL description using variable assignment is shown in Example 5.
Example 5: VHDL Description Using Variable Assignments
--variable assignments

--- Page 85 ---
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity variable_assignment is
port ( a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in, e_in : in std_logic;
       y1_out , y2_out : out std_logic);
end variable_assignment;
architecture arch_variable of variable_assignment is
begin
process ( a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in, e_in)
              variable  variable_1, variable_2, variable_3, variable_4: std_logic;
begin
                 variable_1 := a_in xor b_in;
            variable_2 := variable_1 xor c_in;
                 y1_out <= not variable_2;
                 variable_3 := not (variable_2 xor e_in );
                 variable_4 := not (variable_2 xor d_in );
                 y2_out <= variable_4;
end process;
end arch_variable;
The synthesis outcome is shown in Fig. 4.5. And as shown, as variables are updated instantimmediately, the inferred logic is different as compared to signal assignments.
Fig. 4.5Logic inferred for the variable assignments [1]
4.5 Multiple Process Blocks and Synthesis

--- Page 86 ---
During the RTL design phase, most of the time we need to think about concurrency in thedesign. Under such circumstances, we can have multiple processes. As a designer, we canthink about; what exactly happens when multiple process blocks are used insidearchitecture?Multiple processes will be executed in parallel to infer the logic. Consider the VHDLdescription in Example 6. As described, two different process blocks P1, P2 execute inparallel and infer the logic which has two separate data and control paths.It is always recommended to have the multiple process description for betterreadability and the better timing. The inferred logic can have the clean timing and betterparallelism due to modular design approach.Consider the RTL synthesis for the finite state machine (FSM), if the FSM is codedusing single process block, then the logic inferred does not have the clean timing. So it isrecommended to have the RTL design for the FSM controllers using multiple processblocks. It is recommended to use the separate process block for the ‘next state logic,’ ‘stateRegister’ and for the ‘output logic.’ For the detail discussion about the FSM synthesis,refer to Chap. 6.
Example 6: VHDL Description Using Multiple Process Blocks [1]
--Combinational logic using multiple processes.
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity multi_process is
     port ( enable_in_0 : in std_logic;
                         enable_in_1 : in std_logic;
                              a_in  : in std_logic;
                              b_in  : in std_logic;
                                c_in  : in std_logic;
                                d_in  : in std_logic;
                              e_in  : in std_logic;
                                f_in  : in std_logic;
                                y_out : out std_logic;
                                y1_out: out std_logic);
end multi_process;
--functional definition using multiple processes.
architecture arch_multi_process of multi_process is
begin 

--- Page 87 ---
    P1: process ( enable_in_0, a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in)
                              begin
                                                if ( enable_in_0 =‘1’) then 
                                                      y_out <= b_in xor a_in;
                                                else
                                                      y_out <= d_in xor c_in;
                                                end if;
                              end process;
                              P2: process ( enable_in_1, a_in, b_in, e_in, f_in)
                              begin
                                                if ( enable_in_1 =‘1’) then 
                                                      y1_out <= e_in xor f_in;
                                                else
                                                      y1_out <= b_in xor a_in;
                                                end if;
                              end process;
end arch_multi_process;
The synthesis result for the multiple process architecture is shown in Fig. 4.6. As shown,the logic inferred used separate data and control path elements due to use of multipleprocesses.

--- Page 88 ---
Fig. 4.6Logic inferred due to multiple process synthesis [1]
4.6 Synthesis for Nested If-then-else
One of the powerful VHDL construct is ‘if-then-else’ . Using this construct, the designercan implement multiplexer logic. Even depending on the requirement, the designer can usethis within ‘clk=‘1’ and clk’event’ to infer the sequential logic. The important point tothink is that, can I infer the priority design using ‘if-then-else’ construct. The answer isyes, provided that the description uses nested ‘if-then-else’ construct.The nested ‘if-then-else’ construct infers the priority logic. The VHDL description forthe 4:1 multiplexer is shown in Example 7.
Example 7: VHDL Description Using Nested If-then-else
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity nested_if_mux is
     port (     sel_in : in std_logic_vector ( 1 downto 0);
                           data_in  : in std_logic_vector (3 downto 0);
                             y_out : out std_logic);
end nested_if_mux;
architecture arch_mux_nested_if of nested_if_mux is
begin

--- Page 89 ---
      process ( sel_in, data_in)
                              begin
                                              if ( sel_in =“00”) then 
                                                  y_out <= data_in(0);
                                              elsif ( sel_in =“01”) then 
                                                  y_out <= data_in(1);
                                              elsif ( sel_in =“10”) then 
                                                  y_out <= data_in(2);
                                              else
                                                  y_out <= data_in (3);
                                              end if;
                              end process;
end arch_mux_nested_if;
Each ‘if-then-else’ infers the 2:1 multiplexer. The logic inferred is shown in Fig. 4.7. Asshown in Fig. 4.7, the inferred logic has cascade stages of 2:1 multiplexers with additionaldecoding logic. The main disadvantage of such kind of description is the additional logicin the control path to control the data flow.
Fig. 4.7Logic inferred for the nested if-then-else [1]
Due to cascade stages, the overall propagation delay is the addition of the individualstage delay. This kind of RTL description is suitable when the design needs priorityassignments. Consider priority encoders, priority interrupt controllers.

--- Page 90 ---
4.7 Case Construct and Synthesis
As discussed earlier in the Chap. 3, the ‘case’ and ‘if-then-else’ are powerfulsequential VHDL constructs and should be used inside the process to describe the designfunctionality. The synthesis tool will infer the different logic for the description using the‘case’ and ‘if-then-else.’The ‘case’ construct is described with the selection conditions, and depending on therequired selection condition, the required input is assigned to output. The ‘case’ constructinfers the parallel logic as all the inputs have the same priority. So during the RTL designphase, to infer the parallel logic use the ‘case-end case’ construct.It is mandatory to cover all the conditions while using the ‘case’ construct. If one ofthe conditions is not covered, then unnecessary unintentional latches are inferred. If all theconditions are not required to cover inside the ‘case,’ then use ‘when others’ to avoidunintentional latches. Example 8 describes the use of the ‘case’ construct to realize themultiplexer functionality.
Example 8: VHDL Description Using Case Construct
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity case_mux is
     port (     sel_in : in std_logic_vector ( 1 downto 0);
                            data_in  : in std_logic_vector (3 downto 0);
                              y_out : out std_logic);
end case_mux;
architecture arch_mux_case of case_mux is
begin
      process ( sel_in, data_in)
                              begin
                                              case (sel_in) is
                                              when “00” =>  y_out <= data_in(0);
                                              when “01” =>  y_out <= data_in(1);
                                              when “10” =>  y_out <= data_in(2);

--- Page 91 ---
                                              when others =>  y_out <= data_in(3);
                                              end case ;
                              end process;
end arch_mux_case;
The synthesis for the VHDL description using ‘case’ infers the parallel logic without anyadditional decoding structure. Depending on the status of select inputs, one of the input isassigned to the output to get many to one switch functionality. The delay of such type oflogic is due to delay of the single stage (Fig. 4.8).
Fig. 4.8Logic inferred for the case description [1]
4.8 Priority Logic Using Synthesizable Constructs
If most of the level-sensitive signals are arriving at a time and need to be sensed andprocessed depending on the priority, then the priority encoders can be used. Consider apractical scenario of the processor logic having four-level sensitive interrupts and priorityneed to be scheduled for them, then the logic can be designed by using nested if-elseconstruct of VHDL.Consider the Table 4.3, in which the input INT3 has highest priority and INT0 haslowest priority. Outputs of encoder are y1_out and y0_out.As shown in Table 4.3, the level-sensitive input INT3 has highest priority and INT0has lowest priority. If the above table entries are observed carefully, then we can see theoutput ‘00’ for two input sequences ‘0001’, ‘0000’. If the output of the encoder is given asinput to another functional block, then it is very difficult to differentiate whether an outputof encoder stage is ‘00’ due to input ‘0001’ or due to input sequence ‘0000’ Todifferentiate this, use the flag_out as output of encoder. If all the encoder inputs are havinglogic zero value, then force flag_out to logic 1 otherwise flag_out should be logic 0.
Table 4.3Truth table of 4:2 priority encoder

--- Page 92 ---
INT3INT2INT1INT0y_out(1)y_out(0)
1 X X X 1 1
0 1 X X 1 0
0 0 1 X 0 1
0 0 0 1 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
The VHDL code is shown in Example 9, and its synthesis result is shown in Fig. 4.9.
Fig. 4.9Synthesis result of 4:2 priority encoder [1]
Example 9: VHDL Code for 4:2 Priority Encoder
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity priority_encoder  is
port (  INT : in std_logic_vector ( 3 downto 0);
          flag_out : out std_logic;
          y_out : out std_logic_vector ( 1 downto 0));
end  priority_encoder;
architecture arch_priority_encoder  of priority_encoder  is
begin
process  (INT)
begin
 if(INT(3)=‘1’)  then
y_out <= “11” ;
flag_out <= ‘0’;
elsif(INT(2)=‘1’)  then
y_out <= “10” ;

--- Page 93 ---
flag_out <= ‘0’;
elsif(INT(1)=‘1’) then
y_out <= “01” ;  
flag_out <= ‘0’; 
elsif(INT(0)=‘1’ ) then
y_out <= “00”;
flag_out <= ‘0’;
else
y_out <= “00”;
flag_out <= ‘1’;
end if;
end process;
end arch_priority_encoder;
4.9 Synthesis of Parity Logic
In most of the design applications, we need to compute the parity. In the processingenvironment most of the time we need to compute the parity and most of the processorsuses the parity logic to update the parity flags. For example the even parity and oddparity computation using the input data stream to assign valid parity output. Depending onthe requirement, we can assign ‘1’ or ‘0’ for even and odd parity.VHDL has a powerful construct as loop and can be used to design the parity logic. TheVHDL description using ‘for-loop’ to generate the parity is shown in Example 10.
Example 10: VHDL Description for Parity Generator
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity parity_generator is
     port (     data_in  : in std_logic_vector (3 downto 0);
                                                               y_out : out std_logic);
end parity_generator;

--- Page 94 ---
architecture arch_parity_generator of parity_generator is
begin
      process (data_in)
                variable temp_q_out : std_logic;
     begin
                temp_q_out := ‘0’;
                for count in 0 to 3 loop
                temp_q_out := temp_q_out xor data_in (count);
                end loop;
                y_out <= temp_q_out;
    end process;
end arch_parity_generator;
The logic inferred for Example 10 has cascade elements and due to that it can have moredelay. The synthesis result is shown in Fig. 4.10.
Fig. 4.10Logic inferred for the parity generator [1]
4.10 Latch Based Design and Synthesis
Latches are transparent during the active level and hence results into the least powerdissipation. But the designer needs to consider about time duration of latch enable activewindow and time borrowing.By eliminating the ‘else’ clause while using the ‘if-then-else’ construct the intentionallatches can be inferred. The latch based design can have certain advantages anddisadvantages and will be discussed subsequently during the synthesis.The VHDL description to infer 4-bit latch is shown in the Example 11. The design usesthe asynchronous clear and the 4-bit data input is latched using active high enable to get

--- Page 95 ---
the 4-bit output.
Example 11: VHDL Description for the 4-bit Latch
--Four-bit level-sensitive latch using ’if-then-else’
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity latch_4bit is
     port (     enable_in, reset_in : in std_logic;
                           data_in  : in std_logic_vector (3 downto 0);
                               y_out : out std_logic_vector (3 downto 0));
end latch_4bit;
architecture arch_latch_4bit of latch_4bit is
begin
      process ( enable_in, reset_in, data_in)
                begin
                                               if ( reset_in = ‘1’) then
                                                     y_out <= “0000”;
                                               elsif ( enable_in =‘1’) then
                                                     y_out <= data_in;
                                               end if;
                        end process;
end arch_latch_4bit;
The synthesis outcome is inference of the 4-bit level-sensitive logic with the asynchronousreset and the active high latch enable. It is shown in Fig. 4.11.

--- Page 96 ---
Fig. 4.11 Logic inferred for the 4-bit latch [1]
4.11 PIPO Registers and Synthesis
For the internal data storage, we can use the register array. The register array can have themultiple registers to store the data temporary during the processing. For example, considerthe 16-bit processor, having the internal array of 8 registers  each having 16-bit size.The VHDL description for the 4-bit register is shown in Example 12. On the risingedge (low to high transition) of the clock, data input is assigned to output (Fig. 4.12).
Fig. 4.12Logic inferred for the 4-bit register [1]
Example 12: VHDL Description for the 4-bit Register
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity register_4bit is
     port ( clk, reset : in std_logic;
                data_in  : in std_logic_vector (3 downto 0);
                y_out : out std_logic_vector (3 downto 0));
end register_4bit;
architecture arch_register_4bit of register_4bit is

--- Page 97 ---
begin
      process ( clk, reset)
       begin
                         if ( reset = ‘1’) then
                                    y_out <= “0000”;
                         elsif ( clk=‘1’ and clk’event) then
                                    y_out <= data_in;
                         end if;
     end process;
end arch_register_4bit;
4.12 Synthesis and Logic Inference of Shift Register
The VHDL RTL of the serial input and serial output shift register is shown in Example 13.The synthesis outcome is serial input serial output shift register having rising edge ofclock and active low asynchronous reset (Fig. 4.13).
Fig. 4.13SISO register logic [1]
Example 13: VHDL Code of Serial Input Serial Output Shift Register
--VHDL code for the serial input serial output shift register
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
entity shift_register is
port ( d_in : in std_logic;
         clk : in std_logic;
       reset_n : in std_logic;

--- Page 98 ---
      q_out : out std_logic);
end shift_register;
architecture arch_shift_register of shift_register is
signal q1_out,q2_out : std_logic;
begin
              process ( clk,reset_n)
              begin
                               if (reset_n=‘0’) then
                                               q1_out <= ‘0’;
                                               q2_out <= ‘0’;
                                               q_out <=  ‘0’;
                               elsif (clk=‘1’ and clk’event) then 
                                               q1_out <= d_in;
                                               q2_out <=q1_out;
                                               q_out <=  q2_out;
                               end if;
              end process;
end arch_shift_register;
4.13 Edge Detection Logic and Synthesis
Most of the times, we need to have the logic to detect the positive edge or negative edge.The synchronous logic which operates on the clock edge and described in Example 14(Fig. 4.14).
Fig. 4.14Synthesis result of edge detector [1]
Example 14: VHDL Code for the Edge Detector
library ieee;

--- Page 99 ---
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity edge_detector is
port (  d_in : in std_logic;
          reset_n : in std_logic;
          clk : in std_logic;
        q_out : out std_logic);
end edge_detector;
architecture arch_edge_detector  of edge_detector is
begin
              process  (clk , reset_n)
              begin
                               if(reset_n=‘0’) then
                                              tmp_q_out <= ‘0’;
                               elsif (clk=‘1’ and clk’event) then
                                              tmp_q_out <= d_in;
                               end if;
              end process;
              q_out <= tmp_q_out  xor  d_in;
end arch_edge_detector;
4.14 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Following are important highlights to conclude the chapter:1. Use the separate procedural block that is process block for combinational andsequential design.  
2. Incomplete sensitivity list can create simulation and synthesis mismatch, so use therequired inputs, signals in the sensitivity list.  

--- Page 100 ---
3. Missing sensitivity list will result into infinite looping during simulation. 
4. Sensitivity list is ignored by the Design Compiler (DC) during synthesis.  
5. Signals are updated at the end of the process, and variables are updated immediatelyso have a strategy while using the signal and variable. 
6. Multiple process blocks in design can infer the parallel logic, that is, logic with twoseparate paths.  
7. Multiple architectures are possible in VHDL. During synthesis, the DC couples thelast compiled architecture to infer the logic.  
8. If ‘configuration’ is used then one of the specified architecture can be coupled withentity to infer the desired logic.  
9. For the priority design, use nested ‘if-then-else’ construct.  
10.For the parallel design, use ‘case-end case’ construct.  
11.Do not mix the latches and flip-flops in the same design. 
12.Cover all the required ‘case’ conditions while using ‘case-end case’ construct toavoid the logic with unintentional latches.  
13.Missing ‘else’ clause will generate logic with unintentional latches. To avoid thelogic with unintentional latches, specify all the ‘else’ clauses.  
14.During the data transfer between multiple clock domain designs, use the graypointers.  
15.The binary to gray and gray to binary code converters are required whileimplementing the FIFO design.  
16.The number of assignments within ‘clk=‘1’ and clk’event’ will infer those many flip-flops during synthesis.  
This chapter has given us understanding of the important VHDL constructs and theirapplications during the RTL design stage. The next subsequent chapter discusses theRTL Design and Verification for few complex designs and the challenges during theRTL design phase. Even the next chapter is useful to understand the basics of logicsynthesis.

--- Page 101 ---
Reference
1.www. xilinx. com.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 102 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_5
5. Design and Verification Strategies
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“The efficient RTL design and verification with coverage goals can
save a lot of time during design implementation phase.”
Abstract
The chapter discusses about the complex RTL design and verification
scenarios. The chapter even describes the case study of processor
architecture and discusses about the thought process while developing the
architecture and micro-architecture using the functional specifications of 
SOC. The chapter is useful to understand the strategies and the processes
during the architecture design, RTL design, and verification. The
verification planning and the basic verification architecture for the complex
designs and strategies are also discussed in this chapter.
KeywordsRTL – Architecture – Verification – Coverage – Toggle
coverage – Functional coverage – Code coverage – Verification plan –
Testcase – Corner cases – Latency – H.264 encoder – Pipelining – Speed –
Throughput – Processor – Micro-architecture – Data rate – Video input –
Compressed data
5.1 Design Strategies for Complex Designs

--- Page 103 ---
Consider the complex design implementation using VHDL. We need to use
the synthesizable constructs to infer the required logic. The design should
be well partitioned, and the architecture and micro-architecture of such kind
of design should have information about the interfaces, speed, throughput,
and IPs required.
For example, consider the H.264 encoder design and implementation to
support the HD size and other frames. What information we need?
1. Architecture and micro-architecture document which is the outcome of
the functional design specifications.  
2. Partitioning of the design functional blocks as
a. Intra frame prediction  
b. Inter frame prediction  
c. Transform and quantization blocks 
d. Entropy coding  
e. Frame buffers.  
 
3. For each functional block, we should know about the interface
information with timing.  
4. Information about the internal memory or storage required and
partitioning strategies across sequential boundaries needs to be
considered during the design phase.
 
5. The information about the design pipelining, throughput, and
bandwidth is need to be used during the design and while tweaking the
RTL or during synthesis.
 
6. What should be the technology for ASIC, and what should be target
FPGA that should be known to the design team.  

--- Page 104 ---
For the complex SOC designs depending on the requirements, the RTL
design team can code the RTL for each functional block. The modular
design approach should be used by the team member to have efficient RTL.
The functional verification can be carried out after the RTL design
phase. But for the complex designs, the functional verification and RTL
design phase can kick-start concurrently. Almost around 70% of the design
cycle, time and efforts are spent during the verification phase.
The RTL design at the top level can be visualized as the integration of
the number of functional blocks. As shown in Fig. 5.1, the design has
different functional blocks and the design is partitioned at sequential
boundaries for better speed and clean timing. The RTL top module of H.264
encoder uses the instantiation of all the functional blocks. For each RTL
block, the block level-constraints need to be specified, and finally, for the
top-level design, the constraints should be specified.
Fig. 5.1H.264 encoder architecture
Now for such kind of design what should be the thought process of
architecture team?
1. What kind of video frames the encoder should support? 
2. How many frames per second should be supported by design
and compressed?  

--- Page 105 ---
3. What should be the storage requirements for the HD size image of
1920 × 1080P?  
4. What kind of buffer management is required to store input video
frames? Is it ping-pong structure or circular buffers?  
5. What should be the speed of the H.264 encoder, so that it can process
the required number of frames per second?  
6. Better understanding of the throughput, bandwidth, latency to choose
and define the interfaces.  
7. What should be the internal storage requirements for the reference
video frames? For example, the design requirement is to have 3–5
reference frames for better compression and to achieve this the design
should have number of buffers to hold the required pixels.
 
8. What should be the frame structure for the input packet and what
should be the format for the compressed video at the output ? 
9. Are there any IPs available in the market which are functional and
timing proven? For example, motion estimation, entropy coding IP
cores.
 
10.How to test the design using FPGA? Which kinds of FPGAs are
suitable and what should be logic density of such FPGAs? 
11. What should be the overall expenditure for EDA tools, resources for
such kinds of design, verification, and testing?  
5.2 RTL Design Strategies for SOC
For the complex SOC designs, the RTL design phase can consume almost
around 10–15% of the design time. The design can be partitioned depending
on the functionality, and by using the divide and conquer method, RTL can
be coded. The important point to think is about the plug-and-play functional
and timing proven IPs availability and can they be used during the SOC

--- Page 106 ---
design? For such type of the design, the RTL can be overall integration of
the functional proven IPs, glue logic, and the test and debug logic. The care
should be taken by the RTL design team to use the following important
guidelines during this phase:
1. Try to have a better understanding of the architecture and micro-
architecture of the design.  
2. Try to use the existing IPs and other associated custom logic if the
design is targeted to the same process technology.  
3. Try to have the clarity about the functional dependencies for the design
and the external interfaces required for communication. 
4. Use the RTL design guidelines during the RTL design phase.  
5. Try to have a modular approach while implementing the RTL for each
of the functional block.  
6. Perform the basic verification to check for the functional correctness of
each sub-block to catch the early bugs in the design.  
7. In the top-level design use the test, debug, and tristate logic. 
Consider the high-density SOC shown in Fig. 5.2, now what should be
thought process while developing the RTL. The following can be few
important highlights!

--- Page 107 ---
Fig. 5.2Complex SOC design
1. Try to have the top-level design definition and identify the available
IPs. For example for the SOC shown in Fig. 5.2, IPs are available for
the analog blocks, processor, video processor, DMA controller, and
memory controller and then try to have a separate team for the IP
validation and RTL design.
 

--- Page 108 ---
2. Try to have a better configuration, test and debug management at top
level.  
3. Try to identify the design partitioning for multiple clock and power
domains before RTL design phase.  
4. With reference to the architecture and micro-architecture of the SOC,
try to find the resources required to complete the RTL design and also
to check for the available IP integration at top level.
 
5. Allocate the primary and secondary responsibilities to those resources
and have the project plan in place.  
6. Use the modular approach for the remaining functional blocks. For
example, consider the external memory interface, high-speed memory
interface then the top priority is to have the definition of the input and
output interfaces at block level. This will give a better clarity while
integrating the functional blocks during the top level design
integration.
 
7. Use design partitioning during RTL design phase and code the RTL
using the synthesizable constructs.  
8. Have better clarity about the required throughput, speed, parallelism,
priority logic while coding RTL.  
9. For each block, try to figure out the basic test cases to check for the
functional correctness of the design. Although this is job of
verification engineer, it is mandatory to have RTL without any
functional bugs.
 
10.It is very much required to have better coordination of IP validation
and RTL design team during this phase. It will be ease to the
integration team to integrate the functional blocks to have top-level
design.
 
5.3 Processor Architecture Case Study [1]

--- Page 109 ---
Let us consider the 16-bit or 32-bit configurable processor core. The
efficient architecture and RTL design for any SOC application is not only
useful to improve the reliability of the processor but also improves the
overall performance in terms of area, speed, and power. The major objective
in such kinds of designs is to achieve the higher performance at the lower
clock rates. As discussed earlier, we will use the VHDL to code the RTL.
The processor design should have the feature of programmability, and it is
better to have fewer instructions. The major risk in such types of designs
may be due to the changes in the specifications, addition of the
functionality, and due to the changing market requirements. Under such
circumstances, the architecture should be designed to cope up all these
kinds of changes.
Let us think what the processor core should have?
1. Flexible architecture: The architecture should be flexible enough to
accommodate the changes during the design cycle. To have a better
performance, if I wish to design the architecture, then for the load or
store instructions only the external memory reference can be used. For
all other types of instructions, the inbuilt logic should be used to reduce
the delays and to improve the speed of the processor. External
communication overheads should be as less as possible. This improves
overall efficiency of the processor.
 
2. Pipelining features: To improve the design throughput, the processor
core should have the pipelined control logic. Depending on the
requirements, the design should use the multistage pipelining. Special
attention needs to be given to add the pipelined controlled stages in the
design. If we consider the Intel processors, ARM processors, then the
architectures have the multistage pipelining for the internal data and
instruction queues.
 
3. Internal storage: The processor core architecture should have enough
internal storage. Most of the time we design the architecture which has
more number of general-purpose registers. These general-purpose
registers can be used during the execution of the load and store
instructions. This type of the internal registers can be useful to hold the
operand information required during the instruction execution.
 

--- Page 110 ---
4. Simple instruction set: For the improved throughput and performance
of the core, the instructions should be single cycle and that can be
accomplished by the pipelining. A better RTL implementation for the
instructions used for the data transfer, arithmetic–logical operations,
branching can result in a better performance.
 
5. Operand definitions: The design should have the operands for the
source and destinations, and this kind of mechanism improves the
control paths and their timing.
 
6. External interfaces: The processor core should be such that it should
have the direct port interfaces, register interfaces, and interfaces using
the FIFO to transfer the larger amount of data. Even the high-speed bus
interfaces and network interfaces can be useful for the complex
algorithms and data transfer.
 
7. Port registers for the data transfer: The performance of any
processor is dependent on the IO bandwidth and the interfaces used in
the transfer of the data. If any design needs multiple processor cores,
then to transfer the data from one of the processor core to another we
can think of using direct port connections. Figure 5.3 shows the
mechanism using the output and input registers.
Fig. 5.3Direct port connections
 
The direct port connection to transfer the data from the processor #1 to
processor #2 is shown in Fig. 5.3. As shown when the #1 processor

--- Page 111 ---
completes the instruction execution, then the result is stored in the output
port register.
The contents of the output port register can be transferred to #2
processor and stored in the input register of #2 processor. To perform the
data transfer initially, the #1 processor executes the store instruction, and
subsequently, when the data is required by #2 processor, the #2 processor
can initiate the load data transaction. This kind of mechanism needs
additional control signals for read and write.
Even the queuing of the data is required while transferring data between
the processors. As compare to the direct port interfaces, the high speed data
buses can be used.
5.4 Processor Architecture and Micro-
architecture
The architecture is the block-level representation of the design
specifications. The architecture is developed from the functional
specification of the design. Consider to design the architecture of the 16-bit
processor. What do we need to think?
1. Application: The environment in which the processor works.
Depending on that decide for the functionality. Even the market
research to gather the processor functionality and improvement in them
can play an important role.
 
2. Operations: What are the operations to be supported by the processor?
a. Arithmetic 
b. Logical  
c. Data transfer 
d. Branching 
e. IO control 
 

--- Page 112 ---
3. Size of data transfer: Size of the data bus  
4. Maximum addressable memory: What should be the maximum
addressable memory of the processor? Depending on that extract the
address bus count.
 
5. Multiplexing of the address and data bus: Provision for the
multiplexed buses to reduce the processor pin count.  
6. Performance parameters:
a. Speed  
b. Power  
c. Die size  
d. Latency for the data transfer 
e. Data rate  
f. Throughput  
g. Pipelined stages.  
 
7. Internal storage: The storage required
a. Internal registers for temporary storage 
b. Internal memory RAM, ROM, FIFO buffers. 
 
8. IO interfaces:
a. General-purpose IO ports  

--- Page 113 ---
b. Serial interfaces  
c. Network interfaces  
d. High-speed bus interfaces. 
By using all these parameters, the block-level functionality for basic
processor can be documented and shown in Fig. 5.4. It is the basic
architecture which is the initial phase to kick-starts the design. In the
practical SOC implementations, the architecture design team should have a
good amount of experience and imagination. The team of experts can create
the architectures for the pipelined processor, and it is an iterative process.
Fig. 5.4Processor architecture at basic level
The architecture document should consist of the information about
1. The functionality of each block to perform the operations 

--- Page 114 ---
a. ALU: 16-bit ALU to perform the arithmetic–logical operations
i. The instruction type: Arithmetic, logical, data transfer  
2. The information about the internal storage
a. Register array 
b. Internal memory 
 
3. The high-level information about the data flow
a. Fetch the instruction: Bus interface logic is used.  
b. Decode the instruction: Decoding logic is used.  
c. Execute the instruction: ALU and other associated logic
depending on the type of instruction.  
d. Store the result.
i. In the internal register/memory 
ii. External memory.  
 
 
4. Information about the initialization/configuration and test
registers and logic: Test and debug logic for the initialization and
configuration
 
5. High-level information about the external interfaces (serial and
parallel):
a. Serial interfaces  
 

--- Page 115 ---
b. General-purpose IO interface. 
6. Interrupts: execution of immediate high priority tasks
a. Number of interrupts (if more than one) and interuupt
acknowledge outputs if any   
7. Information about the clock reset network  
8. Information about the constraints  
9. External world connectivity (for the external high-speed interfaces if
any)  
10.Information about the power supplies and voltage domains. 
Pin count:
To get the more external pin visibility, the architecture document can
have the details of the width of each pin.
1. For example, the external memory interfaced to the processor is 1 MB
and then the address bus size should be 20 bit.  
2. The size of the data bus 16 bit. The size of each register is 16 bit. Size
of the memory pointers 20 bit.  
3. The pin count minimization: Use the multiplexed address, data bus is as
shown in Fig. 5.5.  

--- Page 116 ---
Fig. 5.5Multiplexed buses
Table 5.1 gives information about the pin description and the interface
signals required. Refer Fig. 5.4 for the top-level architecture.
Table 5.1External world connectivity
External_interfacePin_countDescription
Data_bus 16 Bidirectional bus to transfer the data
Address_bus 20 For the IO or memory address
Data_control 1 For demultiplexing of the address data lines
R/Wb 1 For read and write. For read operation status on this line is logic
‘1’ and for write operation the status on this line is logic ‘0’
M/IOB 1 The output pin and logic ‘1’ status indicates the memory
operation and logic ‘0’ on this line indicates IO operation

--- Page 117 ---
External_interfacePin_countDescription
Crystal_input 2 Crystal connection pins and used by the in-built oscillator
Serial_in 1 To connect serial input device
Serial_out 1 To connect serial output device
INT 1 Level sensitive interrupt to the processor
INTA 1 Interrupt acknowledge from the processor
Reset_n 1 Active low reset input
In addition to this, the processor should have the power supply
connections. For this discussion, it is ruled out.
5.4.1 Processor Micro-architecture
The micro-architecture for the processor is the sub-block-level
representation of the individual functional blocks. The micro-architecture
should give information about, the high-level logic requirement for the
individual functional blocks and their timing and interface details. The
following section elaborates this in much more details. For the high-density
functional blocks, it may be a difficult task but the micro-architecture
evolution is helpful during the RTL design, verification, and
implementation phase. For few of the important functional blocks the
micro-architecture is described in this section.
5.4.1.1 ALU
It performs the arithmetic and logical operations and ALU is operated on
the two operands. What we should think while developing the micro-
architecture for the ALU?
1. Size of the operand.  
2. Is it allows the pipelined execution of the instructions? If not, then
single-cycle execution is possible for which type of instructions?. 
3. How many logical instructions and arithmetic instructions it supports? 
4. What kind of the status/initialization information is required to perform
the operations?  

--- Page 118 ---
5. Whether it should generate information about the operation status,  for
example the parity, carry overflow, zero result, etc.?  
By using this thought process, the micro-architecture for this block can
be evolved.
As shown in Fig. 5.6, the ALU block is partitioned into the arithmetic
unit and logical unit. The control logic takes the decision to perform either
arithmetic or logical instructions depending on the status of the decoding
logic.
Fig. 5.6ALU micro-architecture
During the RTL design phase this phase can play important role. The
RTL design engineer can use a strategy of using the multiple functional
sub-blocks to partition and code the design. This will be useful to
achieve the better and clean timing. Whether the design size is moderate
or complex this can give the better clarity while using the VHDL
constructs so that design can support and execute only one instruction at
a time.
1. Inter-block dependability: Have a thought process about the inter-
block dependability and timing. Consider the following 

--- Page 119 ---
a. The instruction decoding logic should use the op_code of the
instruction and should decode it.  
b. The operand_1 and operand_2 need to be fetched.  
Table 5.2 gives information about the signals for this block.
Table 5.2ALU signal connectivity at top level
Signal_nameWidthDescription Direction
clk 1 Common clock signalInput
reset_n 1  Active low reset inputInput
operand_1 16 Operand one Input
operand_2 16 Operand 2 Input
op_code 4 4 bit for the 16 instructionsInput
result_alu 16 16-bit output from ALU Output
Flag_out 1 To indicate the overflowOutput
Risk: The single cycle execution is possible for the addition, subtraction,
logical instructions. The risk is the multiplication and division algorithms. It
requires the extra features and pipeline support.
5.4.1.2 Serial Io Interface
The serial devices can communicate with the processor using serial input
and output line. To get the sub-block-level understanding, we can think of:
1. Maximum serial IO data rate.  
2. Maximum clock frequency of the serial IO versus processor clock
speed.  
3. How to segregate the data from serial input to get the required parallel
data.  
4. How to transfer the parallel data into serial form.  

--- Page 120 ---
So at the high level, the logic can be developed using the bidirectional
shift registers and direction control logic.
As shown in Fig. 5.7, the bidirectional shift register is used to
communicate with the serial IO the direction control logic depending on the
IO instruction decides about the data transfer to or from the processor.
Fig. 5.7Serial IO micro-architecture
During the RTL design phase this is helpful to code the design using two
different procedure blocks. One can be used to sample the input data and
other can be used to transfer the serial data. The care should be taken
while writing the RTL for the direction control. This type of logic uses
the sequential shift registers to sample or transfer the data.
The serial interface signal information is given in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3Serial interface connectivity

--- Page 121 ---
Signal_name WidthDescription Direction
clk 1 Common clock signal Input
reset_n 1  Active low reset input Input
Serial_in 1 Serial input to the logic Input
Serial_out 1 Serial output to the logic Output
Data_inout 16 Bidirectional data bus to transfer the dataBidirectional
decode_serial_out1 Input to the block from decoding logicInput
5.4.1.3 Internal Registers
The registers can be used to store the result or can act as data operands. The
micro-architecture can be viewed as parallel-in parallel-out (PIPO) registers
with the read and write control. Depending on the instruction type, the data
can be transferred or stored in these registers. Even the special purpose
pointers can be of PIPO type.
What is the additional logic with these registers?
1. Register selection logic that is decoding logic.  
2. The direction control using the enable signals from the control and
timing unit.  
As shown in Fig. 5.8, the sub-block representation has the decoding
logic, memory, and internal memory pointers.
Fig. 5.8Internal registers and pointers

--- Page 122 ---
During the RTL design phase this is helpful to code the design.
Implement the RTL design using different procedure blocks for
following
1. PIPO logic for the registers and pointers.  
2. Direction control.  
3. Address Decoding logic.  
4. Read/write, increment/decrement logic and address pointer logic. 
Table 5.4 gives information about the signal interfaces and description
for this functional block.
Table 5.4Interrupt control interface
Signal_nameWidthDescription Direction
clk 1 Common clock signal Input
reset_n 1 Active low reset input Input
register_address2 To select one of the register at a timeInput
read/write 1 Input to indicate read or writeInput
int_data_bus 16 Read or write data from/to the registerBidirectional
address_value20 Input to the memory pointer Input
address_pointer20 The external memory bus addressOutput
5.4.1.4 Interrupt Control
To develop the micro-architecture for such kind of the logic, the thought
process can be
1. Information about the type of interrupts (edge or level sensitive). 
2. What is the priority of the interrupts (in case of multiple hardware
interrupts)?  

--- Page 123 ---
3. Enabling and disabling of interrupts and the logic.  
4. The vector locations (branching address) logic (if not supported by any
other mechanism).  
As shown in Fig. 5.9, the sub-block-level representation can sense the
level or edge, can detect the priority, and can process the interrupt
depending on the status of the interrupt enable (Table 5.5).
Fig. 5.9Interrupt control logic
Table 5.5The internal registers and pointer interfaces
Signal_nameWidthDescription Direction
clk 1 Common clock signal Input
reset_n 1 Active low reset input Input
int 1 Input to indicate the level or edge sensitive inputInput
int_data_bus16 To generate the vector address and to accept the
programmable address/status information
Bidirectional
inta 1 Interrupt acknowledge Output
During the RTL design phase this is helpful to code the design.
Implement the RTL using different procedure blocks for the following

--- Page 124 ---
1. Edge or level detection logic.  
2. Priority detection logic.  
3. Interrupt status and branching/scheduling of the interrupt logic. 
5.5 RTL Top-Level Design and Synthesis [1]
The design for the processor can be efficiently achieved using the modular
design approach or the bottom-up approach. Have the design partitioning at
the architecture level and use the reference document as micro-architecture
and code the RTL for the
1. Top_RTL.vhd
a. ALU.vhd  
b. Internal_memory.vhd 
c. Bus_interface.vhd 
d. Internal_registers.vhd 
e. Interrupt_conttrol.vhd 
f. Timing_control.vhd
i. Timers_counter.vhd  
g. Serial_IO_control.vhd 
 
Use the synchronizers, tristate logic and clock reset network in the top
block.

--- Page 125 ---
5.5.1 Block-Level Design
The team members (RTL design, Verification, Synthesis, and STA team)
can perform the following:
1. Code the efficient RTL for each functional block.  
2. Verify the design using the required tests.  
3. Use the block-level constraints and synthesize the design. 
4. Check for whether the constraints can meet or not?  
5. Perform the timing simulation and pre-layout STA. Fix the setup time
violations using the RTL tweaks, architecture tweaks.  
5.5.2 Top-Level Design
The team can perform following tasks
1. Create the Top.vhd using the instantiation and verify the design. 
2. Check for the coverage goals met or not?  
3. Synthesize the design using top-level constraints.  
4. Check for the constraints met or not?  
5. Perform the pre-layout timing for the top.vhd.  
6. Check for the timing violations and fix them using the necessary
tweaks.  
5.6 Strategies for SOC Verification
To check the functional correctness of the design, the testbench can be used.
The driver or stimulus generator can force the required signals such as ‘clk,’
‘reset_n,’ and ‘data_in” according to the design requirements. But this is

--- Page 126 ---
useful for the design which has a moderate gate count. For the complex
SOCs, the verification needs to be carried out at block level, top level, and
chip level.
Most of the time is utilized to find the functional bugs in design, and to
save the time, the process can be automated using the HVLs and the self-
checking layered testbenches.
The objective is to fulfill the specified coverage goals. The HVLs such
as System Verilog are popular in the industries and used for coverage driven
verification.
The RTL verification for the complex design can consume almost
around 65–70% of the overall design cycle time, and the following can be
done to achieve the coverage goals.
1. Better Verification planning: Have verification plan for the block-
level verification, top-level verification, and full-chip verification. 
2. Verification cycle and kickoff: Kickoff verification phase
simultaneously with RTL design phase and use the functional model as
golden reference during verification.
 
3. Test cases: By understanding the design functionality at block- and
chip-level, document the required test cases and use test plan to achieve
the specified block-level and chip-level coverage goals.
 
4. Randomize test cases: Create the test cases and randomize them to
carry out the verification for the block-level design.  
5. Better testbench architecture: Develop the automated multilayer
testbench architecture using driver, monitor, and scoreboards.  
6. Define coverage goals: Define the coverage goals such as functional,
code, toggle, and constrained randomized coverage at the block level
and at the chip level.
 
The testbench should perform the following:
1. Generate required stimulus.  

--- Page 127 ---
2. Apply stimulus to the DUT or DUV.  
3. It should capture the response.  
4. It should check for the functional correctness of the design. 
5. It should be used to measure progress against the overall verification
goals.  
What need to be thought about the design inputs while randomizing?
1. Information about the device configuration.  
2. Information about the environment configuration.  
3. What is the input data stream and information about the input packets. 
4. What are the different protocols and what are the protocol exceptions? 
5. What kind of delays and delay routines?  
6. Where to report about the errors and violations?  
The layered testbench architecture is shown in Fig. 5.10.

--- Page 128 ---
Fig. 5.10Layered testbench [1]
Command Layer: The command layer has the driver which drives the
command to the DUT, and the monitor captures the transition of the signals
and groups them together in the form of the command. Consider bus write
or read command in AHB. The assertions also drive the DUT.
Functional Layer: Above the command layer, the functional layer in
which the agent or transactor drives the driver after receiving the high-level
transaction such as DMA read and write. Such type of transaction can be
broken into multiple commands to drive the driver.
Scoreboard and checker: To predict the result of the transactions, these
commands are sent to the scoreboard and the checker compares the
commands from monitor with the scoreboard.
If we consider the H.264 Encoder, then to test for the multiple frame
processing, frame size, type, these parameters can be configured by using
the constrained random values of these parameters. This is what we call it
as creating the scenario to verify the particular functionality.

--- Page 129 ---
5.7 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
The following are the important points to summarize this chapter.
1. Have a better definition of the design specification using the
architecture and micro-architecture document.  
2. During the design try to have a better understanding of the parallelism,
priority logic and interface speed.  
3. During the RTL design, try to have better understanding of the
functional blocks and their dependability.  
4. During top-level integration, use the configuration, test, and debug
logic.  
5. Try to identify the functional and timing proven IPs available in the
market, before RTL design kickoff.  
6. If IPs are used in the design, then understand the timing and interfaces
and create the wrappers for the connectivity.  
7. Have a better verification plan and test case generation for the block-
level, top-level and chip-level designs.  
8. Define the coverage goals for the constrained random verification. 
9. Use the layered testbench and monitor the desired coverage. 
This chapter has given us understanding about the RTL design and
verification strategies for the complex designs. Even we have discussed
about the architecture and micro-architecture of the basic
processor design. The next chapter discusses about the FSM, FSM
synthesis, performance improvement techniques and the buses, data
transfer mechanisms, bus arbiters, DSP based system architecture and
their requirements in the complex SOCs. The synthesis strategies will be
discussed with few important design scenarios.

--- Page 130 ---
Reference
1. www. springer. com: “Advanced HDL Synthesis and SOC Prototyping: Vaibbhav Taraate”.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 131 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_6
6. VHDL Design and RTL Tweaks
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“The design performance can be improved using better
architecture and RTL tweaks.”
Abstract
During the RTL design phase, how RTL design team transforms
functionality using efficient VHDL constructs to infer the intended logic is
very important aspects. Using synthesizable constructs and modular
approach, the RTL at block level can be partitioned into multiple functional
blocks. The RTL tweaks and architecture tweaks before synthesis to infer
the intended logic can yield the better synthesis result for the required
constraints. In such circumstances, the chapter is useful to understand the
FSM design, optimization, RTL tweaks, and other performance
improvement techniques. The chapter also discusses the bus arbiters, data
transfer schemes, and how to think about the DSP-based system design.
KeywordsState machines – Moore – Mealy – Asynchronous reset –
Synchronous reset – Sequence detector – FSM synthesis – FSM
optimization – Bus topology – Arbiter – DSP processor – DSP elements –
VHDL – RTL tweaks – Performance improvement

--- Page 132 ---
Most of the time due to inefficient RTL, the synthesis tool will not be able
to infer the intended logic. For example, if the RTL designer wishes to infer
the parallel logic and the RTL is coded using the ‘if-then-else,’ then the
synthesis tool will infer the priority logic. Or if multiple sequential blocks
need to be executed in parallel and the RTL design has single ‘process’
block, then the synthesis tool will not be able to infer the parallelism. In
such circumstances, the required optimization and RTL tweaks are
discussed in the following few sections.
6.1 Reset Strategies
Reset is used for initialization of the design. We can have asynchronous or
synchronous reset depending on the design requirements. It can be active
low or active high reset. To avoid the issues due to reset, we can have the
reset tree.
6.1.1 Asynchronous Reset
This type of reset is independent of the active clock edge and hence called
as asynchronous reset. It is used to initialize the design irrespective of clock
edge. The RTL using VHDL is described in Example 1 and uses the
asynchronous reset.
Example 1: RTL Using Asynchronous Reset
library IEEE;
use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
entity asynchronous_reset is
    Port ( data_in : in std_logic;
          clk : in std_logic;
           reset_n : in std_logic;
           data_out : out std_logic );
end asynchronous_reset;
--Functional description of asynchronous reset

--- Page 133 ---
architecture arch_async_reset of asynchronous_reset is
begin
process ( clk , reset_n)
begin
                If ( reset_n=‘0’)  then
                                data_out  <= ‘0’;
                                elsif (clk = ‘1’ and clk’event) then 
                                data_out  <= data_in;
                end if;
end process;
end arch_async_reset;
The synthesis tool infers the logic shown in Fig. 6.1 for the asynchronous
reset. As shown, the inferred logic does not have any element in the reset
path. So this type of logic has the lesser area as compared to synchronous
reset.
Fig. 6.1Synthesis outcome for the asynchronous reset
6.1.2 Synchronous Reset
Initialization of the sequential element due to the synchronous reset is
dependent on the active edge of the clock. As described in Example 2, the

--- Page 134 ---
output of sequential cell is assigned to zero using the synchronous reset
which is sampled on the rising edge of the clock.
Example 2: RTL for Synchronous Reset
library IEEE;
use IEEE.STD_LOGIC_1164.ALL;
entity synchronous_reset is
    Port ( data_in : in std_logic;
              clk : in std_logic;
           reset_n : in std_logic;
           data_out : out std_logic );
end synchronous_reset;
-- Functional description of register using synchronous reset 
architecture arch_sync_reset of synchronous_reset is
begin
 process ( clk)
 begin
               if (clk = ‘1’ and clk’event) then 
                         If ( reset_n = ‘0’) then
                           data_out  <= ‘0’;
                           else
                            data_out  <= data_in;
                          end if;
               end if;
  end process;  
end arch_sync_reset;

--- Page 135 ---
The synthesis outcome is shown in Fig. 6.2, and as shown, the inferred
logic has the additional combinational element in the reset path. This
increases the area.
Fig. 6.2Synthesis result for synchronous reset
6.2 State Machines
The state machine controllers are used to detect sequence as well as to
generate the sequence. The Moore and Mealy state machines can be
designed using modular approach and the objective during RTL design is to
have the glitch-free output. In such kind of the designs, the intended goal of
the RTL design engineer is to have optimization with the clean timing.
Depending on the need, the designer can use the binary, gray, or one-hot
encoding schemes to achieve the required results.
The random counters, sequence detectors, and DRAM refresh sequence
can be coded by using the state machine.
6.2.1 Moore Machine
In the Moore machine, the output is function of the current state only. It
needs to wait for one clock cycle to reflect the change at the output after
changes in the input. This type of machine needs one more extra state as
compared to Mealy machine.
The following are few highlights of Moore FSM:

--- Page 136 ---
1. In the Moore FSM, the output is function of current state only.  
2. As output is function of the current state, it is stable for one clock
cycle.  
3. Due to shorter combinational path, the STA is simple for the controllers
designed using the Moore FSM. This results in higher operating
frequency as compared to Mealy machine.
 
4. It needs more states as compared to the Mealy machine, but the output
is glitch-free as it is function of the current state only (Fig. 6.3).
Fig. 6.3Moore machine block diagram
 
6.2.2 Mealy Machine
In the Mealy machine, the output is function of the current state and input
also. This type of machine can result in the output with glitches. This type
of machine needs one less state as compared to Mealy machine if coded by
binary encoding techniques.
The following are few highlights of Mealy FSM:
1. In the Mealy FSM, the output is function of current state and input also. 
2. As output is function of the current state and input, it can change
multiple times during clock period.  

--- Page 137 ---
3. Due to larger combinational path, the STA is complex for the
controllers designed using the Mealy FSM. This results in the lower
operating frequency as compared to Moore machine.
 
4. It needs less states as compared to the Moore machine, but the output is
prone to glitches (Fig. 6.4).
Fig. 6.4Mealy machine block diagram
 
Few tricks to improve the Performance of the FSMs:
To improve the performance of the FSMs, use following techniques at the
RTL level.
1. Do not use single ‘process’ block to code the FSMs as it does not yield
into the efficient results.  
2. To achieve the efficient synthesis for the FPGA/ASIC, use the multiple
‘process’ block. In practice, we can think of using.
a. Use separate process block for the next state logic which should
infer the combinational logic.  
b. Use another process block for the state register and sensitive to the
active edge of the clock.  
c. Third process block for the output logic and it should infer the
combinational logic.  
 

--- Page 138 ---
3. Use level-sensitive process block for the next state and output logic as
they are combinational in nature.  
4. Use the clk = ‘1’ and clk’ event or clk='0' and clk'event inside the state
register block as this block is triggered on the active clock edge may be
positive or negative.
 
5. Use the desired encoding method.
a. Binary encoding needs n flip-flops for the 2n states  
b. Gray encoding needs n flip-flops for the 2n states  
c. One-hot encoding needs 2n flip-flops for the 2n states. 
 
6. To avoid the latch inference, use the ‘when others’ condition or cover
all the case conditions while using the case construct. 
7. To assign the current state value depending on the next state logic
output, use the ‘if-then-else’ construct and take care that the intended
logic should be sensitive to the active edge of clock.
 
8. If area is not a bottleneck in the design and clean timing is required,
then use one-hot encoding FSMs.  
9. For glitch-free output, use the registered output.  
6.3 RTL Design of Moore Machine
As discussed earlier in the Moore machine, the output is function of the
current state. To detect the sequence of ‘101,’ the RTL is described using
the synthesizable constructs and is shown in the Example 3. The synthesis
outcome for the Moore FSM is shown in Fig. 6.5.

--- Page 139 ---
Fig. 6.5Synthesis outcome of Moore machine to detect “101”
Example 3: RTL Design Using VHDL for Moore Machine
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
entity moore_machine is
Port ( clk : in std_logic;
data_in : in std_logic;
reset_in : in std_logic;
data_out : out std_logic);
end moore_machine;
architecture arch_moore of moore_machine is
type state_type is ( S0, S1, S2, S3);
signal present_state, next_state : state_type;
begin
              State_register : process (clk, reset_in)
              begin

--- Page 140 ---
                     if (reset_in  =  ‘0’) then
                   present_state  <= S0;
                   elsif (clk = ‘1’ and clk’event ) then
                   present_state  <= next_state;
                   end if;
end process;
next_state_logic : process(present_state, data_in)
begin
            next_state  <= S0; 
            case (present_state) is 
            when S0  =>if (data_in  =  ‘1’) then
            next_state  <= S1;
            else
            next_state  <= S0; 
            end if; 
        when S1  =>if (data_in  =  ‘1’) then
           next_state  <= S1;
           else
           next_state  <= S2;
           end if; 
        when S2  => if (data_in  =  ‘1’) then
           next_state  <= S3;
           else
           next_state  <= S0; 
           end if; 
        when S3  => if (data_in  =  ‘1’) then
           next_state  <= S1;
           else
           next_state  <= S2; 
           end if; 

--- Page 141 ---
           when others=> next_state  <=S0; 
           end case; 
    end process;
 output_comb_logic : process(present_state) 
  begin 
             case (present_state) is 
            when S0  => data_out  <= ‘0’; 
            when S1  => data_out  <= ‘0’; 
            when S2  => data_out  <= ‘0’; 
            when S3  => data_out  <= ‘1’; 
            when others  => data_out  <= ‘0’;
            end case;
  end process;
end arch_moore;
6.4 RTL Design of Mealy Machine
In the Mealy machine, the output is function of the current state and input .
To detect the sequence of ‘101,’ the RTL is described using the
synthesizable constructs and is shown in Example 4. The synthesis outcome
for the Mealy FSM is shown in Fig. 6.6.
Fig. 6.6Synthesis outcome of Mealy machine to detect “101”

--- Page 142 ---
Example 4: RTL Design Using VHDL for Mealy Machine
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
entity mealy_machine is
Port ( clk : in std_logic;
data_in : in std_logic;
reset_in : in std_logic;
data_out : out std_logic);
end mealy_machine;
architecture arch_mealy of mealy_machine is
type state_type is ( S0, S1, S2, S3);
signal present_state, next_state : state_type;
begin
             State_register : process (clk, reset_in)
             begin
                 if (reset_in  =  ‘0’) then
                 present_state  <= S0;
                 elsif (clk = ‘1’ and clk’event ) then
                 present_state  <= next_state;
                end if;

--- Page 143 ---
end process;
next_state_logic_and_output_decoder : process(present_state, data_in)
begin
data_out  <= ‘0’; 
case (present_state) is 
  when S0  =>  if (data_in  =  ‘1’) then
            next_state  <= S1;
            data_out  <= ‘0’;
            else
            next_state  <= S0;
            data_out  <= ‘0’; 
                        end if; 
  when S1  => if (data_in  =  ‘1’) then
          next_state  <= S1;
          data_out  <= ‘0’;
          else
          next_state  <= S2;
          data_out  <= ‘0’; 
          end if; 
  when S2  => if (data_in  =  ‘1’) then

--- Page 144 ---
            next_state  <= S1;
            data_out  <= ‘1’;
            else
            next_state  <= S0;
            data_out  <= ‘0’; 
           end if; 
  when others  => next_state  <= S0;
                data_out  <= ‘0’;
  end case;
 end process;
end arch_mealy;
6.5 FSM Synthesis and Optimization
The FSM described using VHDL can be synthesized to get the clean timing
and lesser area. In such scenario, the better partitioning and the optimization
techniques can be used. The FSM synthesis is elaborated in Chaps. 8 and 9
with more scenarios.
Have separate design for FSM controller: Use the design partitioning
at functional or synthesis level to have dedicated logic for the FSM
controllers. After synthesis, if the performance is met then use
‘don’t_touch’ attribute to avoid the resynthesis.
Isolate the state machine controllers: If the SOC design has multiple
clock domain and if they need the FSM controllers, then isolate the FSM
controllers. Use the sequential boundaries and group the logic depending
on the clock regions.

--- Page 145 ---
Clean timing and optimization: For the better timing, use the one-hot
encoding FSM, but this will effect on the area.
Modular design approach: If the design requirement is of the multiple
FSMs, then code the separate RTL for each FSM controller.
Use of the FSM compiler: For the better design partitioning of the logic
and to extract the states in the form of state table, use the FSM compiler.
Optimization for the glitch-free output: Code the FSM with glitch-free
output and it can be ensured by having the sequential output boundaries.
Shorter combinational delay: Overall, timing performance of FSM can
be improved by reducing the combinational delay of the next state logic.
This will result in the better FSM performance.
The FSM controller synthesis result should infer the separate logic for the
‘next state,’ ‘state register,’ and ‘output.’
6.6 Data Transfer and Arbiter Design
To transfer the data between the different functional blocks, commonly high
speed buses are used. But this can be also accomplished by use of the
shared memory, registers with read/write capabilities, FIFOs, and even
using the bus protocols.
Most of the time, during the design we use the buses that can be high-
speed buses on which processor can initiate transactions or low-speed buses
which can be used for the slower data transfer. So during the architecture
evolution, the strategies need to be defined to model the buses. Instead of
using the single bus, it is advisable to use the multiple buses depending on
the data rate required.
Commonly used buses for serial data transfer are I2C, SPI and even the
asynchronous data transfer can be accomplished by controlling baud rate of
UART.
For the high-end SOC designs, the speed of the design depends upon the
buses used for communication. The AHB/APB buses can be good choice
for large density SOC designs. The IPs of these type of buses are available
in the market, and as they are functional and timing proven, they can be
used during SOC design phase.
As multiple design blocks are using the common buses, the RTL design
team should be able to understand the required bus arbitration schemes, and
these can be deployed during design phase. Few of the arbitration schemes

--- Page 146 ---
are daisy chaining, round-robin, static arbitration, etc. The following section
discusses the bus arbiter.
6.6.1 Bus Arbitration
The shared bus can be shared by multiple functional modules (components)
in the design environment. Depending on the request generated by one of
the modules, the bus can be granted if it is not busy.
The bus arbitration is used to sample the requests generated by the
different SOC components coupled with shared bus and to grant the request
to one of the SOC components.
As shown in Fig. 6.7, the multiple components (module 1 to module n)
generate the request to the bus arbiter and waits for the grant signals from
the arbiters. After receiving the grant signal from the bus arbiter, one of the
components gains the control of the shared bus.
Fig. 6.7Bus arbitrations [1]
In the practical environment, there are many schemes to design the bus
arbitration, and they can be daisy chaining, round-robin, and static
arbitrations. Depending on the design requirements, these schemes can be
used in the SOC designs (Fig. 6.8).

--- Page 147 ---
Fig. 6.8Synthesis outcome of static arbiter scheme
The static arbitration using VHDL is described in Example 5. The
‘request_0’ has highest priority and ‘request_2’ has lowest priority. The
synthesis result is shown in the Fig. 6.8.
Example 5: RTL Design Using VHDL for Static Arbiter
Library ieee;
Use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
Entity static_arbiter is
Port  (
 clk , reset_n, request_0, request_1, request_2 : in std_logic;
grant_0,grant_1,grant_2: out std_logic);
end static_arbiter;
architecture arch_arbiter of static_arbiter is
begin

--- Page 148 ---
         process (clk,reset_n,request_0, request_1,request_2)
         begin
         if (reset_n = ‘0’) then
                 grant_0 <=‘0’;
                 grant_1 <=‘0’;
                 grant_2 <=‘0’;
         elsif(clk = ‘1’ and clk’event) then 
                 grant_0 <= request_0;
                 grant_1  <= (request_1 and  (not request_0));
                 grant_2 <=( request_2 and (not(request_1 or request_0)));
         end if;
         end process;
end arch_arbiter;
Now, let us consider how we can add the bus grant signals for the multiple
bus requests. Consider the bus is shared by the processor, high-speed data
controller, and memory controller. As it is shared bus, if bus is not busy
then the grant signal needs to be provided to the functional block which has
requested for bus. In such scenario, the bus arbitration needs to be deployed
to avoid bus contention and to accomplish the data transfer between the
elements.
The RTL for the arbiter with bus busy input is described in Example 6.
The synthesis outcome is shown in Fig. 6.9.

--- Page 149 ---
Fig. 6.9Synthesis outcome of bus arbiter with busy signal
Example 6: RTL Design Using VHDL for the Arbiter with Busy
Signal
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
Entity arbiter1 is
Port  (
 clk , reset_n, request_0, request_1, request_2 : in std_logic;
busy_bus : in std_logic;
grant: out std_logic_vector (2 downto 0));
end arbiter1;
architecture arch_arbiter of arbiter1 is
 signal busy_bus_1, busy_bus_2 :  Std_logic;
begin
         p1: process ( clk, reset_n)

--- Page 150 ---
    begin
         if (reset_n = ‘0’) then 
         busy_bus_1  <=‘0’;      
         elsif(clk = ‘1’ and clk’event) then
      busy_bus_1 <= busy_bus;
         end if;
    endprocess p1; 
         p2: process (busy_bus, busy_bus_1 )
    begin
    if (busy_bus = ‘0’ and busy_bus_1 = ‘1’ ) then  
    busy_bus_2  <=‘1’;
    else
    busy_bus_2  <=‘0’; 
    end if;
    end process p2;
         p3: process (clk,reset_n) 
         begin
         if (reset_n = ‘0’) then
         grant  <=“000”;
         elsif ( clk = ‘1’ and clk’event) then 
         if (busy_bus_2 = ‘1’) then 
         grant  <=“000”;
         elsif (busy_bus = ‘0’) then 
         grant(0)  <= request_0;
         grant(1)  <= request_1 and not(request_0);
         grant(2)  <= request_2 and not (request_1) and not(request_0);
         end if;

--- Page 151 ---
         end if;
         end process;
         end arch_arbiter;
6.7 DSP-Based Designs and RTL Strategies
While architecting for the SOC for the DSP applications, what we need to
think? This is answered in this section
1. What kind of DSP processor core I can choose?
DSP applications require high bandwidth due to complexity of high-
end data processing algorithms. So most of the time, we will try to use
available IPs during SOC design phase. The capability of IPs and core
decides overall speed, throughput for the design.
a. The core should have capability to perform the floating point
operations.  
b. For DSP applications, larger amount of internal memory and
storage registers are required. So the core should have the
capability to have the required registers which can be used during
the computation.
 
c. The additional need is the circular buffers and FIFO mechanisms to
support the queuing of the data.  
d. The core should have the high-density multipliers and large density
accumulators and shifters. These can be used during filtering
operations.
 
e. The architecture should support the separate program and data
memory access as well as pipelining and multitasking features. 
f. The core should have additional data transfer interfaces for high-
speed data transfer.  
 

--- Page 152 ---
2. The core should have on-chip DMA capability: For the burst of the
data transfer, the DSP system should have the on-chip DMA controller.
This will be used during the burst of data transfers without involving
the DSP processor. While designing the DSP systems, the speed of the
DMA is important parameter, and during the top level design, care
should be taken by the integration team to deploy the required
synchronizers for the multiple clock domain designs.
 
3. The core should have the serial interfaces: The capabilities like serial
data transfer using I2C or SPI can be added advantage. They can be
used to interface the eternal serial devices with the SOC [1]. Most of
the time, the serial devices are used to transfer or accept the serial data,
and in this scenario, the serial bus controller capabilities can be used.
 
4. The core should have the on-chip PLL: The phase locked loops are
used to generate the clock and the additional clock distribution logic for
the clock distribution with uniform clock skew [1]. So if we imagine
the clocking structure for the prototype using multiple FPGAs, then we
can imagine the clock tree which can generate clocks with uniform
clock skew.
 
5. The core should have the real-time data processing: Consider the
application as HD size video frame encoding, and for such applications,
the real-time data should be compressed and need to be outputted by
the encoder. In such scenarios, the real-time data, the timers, and real-
time clocking capabilities should be present in the DSP SOC [1].
 
6. Additional USB controllers for serial data transfer: The USB
interface for the serial data transfer between the host system and the
DSP processor core can be used in most of the architectures.
 
7. Additional analog blocks and interfaces: The analog blocks like
ADCs and DACs should be present for the data conversion. 
Additional with all above, the bus controllers and their capabilities for
high-speed data transfer need to be thought. By considering all these
features, the architecture of the SOC for the DSP capabilities can be

--- Page 153 ---
designed and evolved. Figure 6.10 describes important components of DSP
system.
Fig. 6.10Architecture for the DSP processing system [1]
6.8 Recommended RTL Tweaks
As discussed in previous few chapters, during the RTL design phase the
complex designs are partitioned across the sequential boundaries by
considering the functionality of the design. The Following can be few of the
important recommendations for RTL tweaks.

--- Page 154 ---
1. The RTL design for any functional block should result into the
intended logic. Now imagine the functionality is coded using the
single ‘case-end case’ constructs and has more than 16 conditions,
then it is recommended to tweak the RTL using multiple ‘case.’ This
will result in the improved parallelism and clean timing.
 
2. Now imagine another scenario, the design uses ‘if-then-else’ construct
and requirement is of parallel logic without any priority. In such
circumstances, the RTL can be tweaked using the multiple process
blocks and ‘case’ construct.
 
3. If the RTL uses the tristate logic, then tweak the logic using the
multiplexers. Although it is recommended to have tristate logic at top
level.
 
4. Consider the multiple clock domain design RTL, and then deploy the
synchronizers for ASIC design. For the FPGA designs, have the
separate synchronizer design (either level, pulse) and deploy them in
the required control paths.
 
5. Tweak the RTL using the grouping technique for getting the inference
of logic into two multiple data paths.  
6. Tweak the RTL by pushing the common resources at the output side
and chain of selection logic at the input side.  
7. If the multiple unused states are there in FSM controller, then tweak
the RTL to remove the redundant states or use the ‘when others’ to
initialize unused states output to the initialization sequence.
 
8. If the common factors or expressions are used during the RTL, then
tweak the RTL to avoid the repeated logic inference due to the
common factors.
 
9. Tweak the RTL in such a way that the design should have better
structure, readability, and better partitioning across the sequential
boundaries.
 

--- Page 155 ---
10.If FIFO RTL is developed and the issue is of the write and read
address generation, then tweak the RTL by using the Gray pointers. 

--- Page 156 ---
6.9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
The following are important points to conclude the chapter:
1. The FSM controller can be designed using the Moore or Mealy
machines.  
2. In the Moore machine, output is function of current state whereas in
Mealy machine output is function of the present input and current state. 
3. Use the multiple ‘process’ blocks during RTL design of state machines,
sequence generator.  
4. For clean timing, use the one-hot encoding FSM.  
5. For glitch-free output in Moore FSM, use the registered output and
monitor the behavior of the register to register path.  
6. Bus arbiters are used to avoid bus contention, and there are many
schemes like static arbiter, round-robin arbiter.  
7. Instead of using the single bus in SOC, try to use multiple buses for the
processor and peripheral.  
8. The DSP capabilities should include the floating point operations and
on-chip DMA controllers.  
This chapter has given us understanding about the FSM synthesis,
Moore, Mealy machine, and how to improve performance of the state
machine. Even we have discussed about the RTL tweaks, arbiter, and
how to explore the architecture for DSP-based applications. The next
chapter will discuss about the ASIC synthesis using Synopsys DC and
important DC commands used during synthesis.
Reference
1. www. springer. com: “Advanced HDL Synthesis and SOC Prototyping : Vaibbhav Taraate”.

--- Page 157 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 158 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_7
7. ASIC Synthesis and Design Constraints
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“ASIC synthesis team should have better understanding about the
block level, top level and chip level design constraints.”
Abstract
The chapter discusses the ASIC synthesis and frequently used Synopsys DC
commands and their role during ASIC synthesis. Even the chapter discusses
about the design partitioning, synthesis guidelines, and design constraints.
The DC commands used during the synthesis and their role are described
for better understanding of synthesis scripts or to create synthesis scripts for
the required constratints. The chapter is useful to understand the area, speed
constraints, and logic synthesis using Synopsys DC.
KeywordsASIC – SOC – Logic synthesis – Physical synthesis –
Constraints – Area – Speed – Power – DC commands – Clock – Latency –
Generated clocks – False path – Multicycle path – Input delay – Output
delay – Timing report – Optimization – Clock network
7.1 Design Partitioning for Complex Designs
Most of the time, we discuss about the top level architecture with the better
partitioning of the design. The design partitioning for any ASIC or SOC is

--- Page 159 ---
important milestone to realize the efficient prototype with clean timing
path. SOC or ASIC design has analog and digital blocks, and design team
needs to have better understanding of the EDA tool chain used during
various milestones! During logic and physical syntheses, the objective of
team is to have the optimization of the design for the area, speed, and
power. The design can be partitioned at the architecture level, at synthesis
or netlist level. Under such circumstances, following can be thought process
while partitioning the complex designs.
1. Hardware and software partitioning: For the complex SOCs, the
software and hardware partitioning is the main requirement. The reason
being, the time instance at which software functional calls are executed
and the latency required to transfer or fetch the data plays important
role to get desired throughput. The main goal of architect team is to
have the low latency during high-speed data transfer. Which
functional blocks need to be implemented using the software and which
blocks need to be designed using Hardware Construction Language
(HCL) or HDL should be decided at the architecture level to achieve
better performance, speed, power, and bandwidth.
 
2. Partitioning for power domain isolation: During this decade, the real
requirement is low power and multiple power domain designs. The
power requirements for analog and digital blocks vary depending on
the logic density and so the fundamental question which we need to
address is, can we have strategy to isolate power domains depending on
the requirement of analog and digital blocks? The answer is ‘yes’ as
design should have analog and digital power domain isolations, and it
is recommended to have the low power architecture with the power
sequence.
 
3. Partitioning the design at sequential boundaries: Most of the time
for the clean timing the main requirement is efficient design
partitioning and that should be achieved at sequential boundaries. For
example, if we consider the H.264 encoder which needs the
functional blocks as prediction, quantization, transform, and entropy
coding, then we can partition the design at block level across sequential
boundaries. Again by using the modular approach, we can partition the
 

--- Page 160 ---
functional block-level design by using registered inputs and registered
outputs.
4. Partitioning by considering multiple clock domains: Most of the
SOCs have the multiple clocks. For example, consider the SOC which
has multiple processors, bus controller, and memory controller then in
such kinds of designs the processor, bus controller, and memory
controller may work at the different clock frequency. The immediate
need is to have the multiple clock domain architectures for such kind of
design. The strategies to deploy synchronizers need to be decided at top
level. So partitioning of the design by considering the processor as
CLKI domain, bus controller into CLKII domain, and memory
controller into CLKIII domain will be useful to create the seperate
design and path groups.
 
5. Partitioning for the FPGA-based Designs: FPGAs are good
candidates for the digital logic implementation. The SOC has digital
and analog blocks so partition the design to have separate prototype for
digital and analog blocks. Implementation strategy should be by using
the single or multiple FPGAs to implement the digital design. For the
analog blocks, such as ADCs, DACs, clocking structures, power
supply, and temperature monitoring/cooling blocks, use the separate
analog equivalent boards with required interfaces.
Few of the important highlights for such kind of design
implementation and prototype using FPGA are listed below.
a. Check whether the design needs single or multiple FPGA prototype 
b. Check for the IO availability and data transfer rate and partitioning
at sequential boundaries.  
c. If multiple FPGAs are required then use the required bus
connectivity/topology as daisy chaining, star or mixed
interconnect.
 
 
6. Partition to have modular FSM controllers: Most of the SOCs need
the power sequencing algorithms, DDR needs the refresh cycles, and
bus controller needs the high-speed data transfer. In such kind of
 

--- Page 161 ---
designs, use the modular approach while implementing the FSM
controllers. The target should be the clean timing and lesser area. Use
the gray or one-hot encoding techniques while implementing the FSM
controllers. Try to have the FSM controller design with glitch-free
output.
7. Partition for better configuration management: Partition the design
at the architecture level to have the dedicated configuration registers,
memories to initialize the sequence for the SOC.
 
7.2 ASIC Synthesis
As most of us are familiar with the term synthesis, the synthesis is process
of converting the design from the higher level of abstraction to the lower
level of abstraction. The logic and physical synthesis need to be carried out
to achieve the desired goals to have the minimum area and power. Another
important goal is that the design should meet the required speed constraints.
During the synthesis phase, the design team can use the optimization and
performance improvement techniques to achieve the better results. The
synthesis tool uses following inputs to perform the synthesis:
1. RTL design  
2. The ASIC libraries 
3. The design constraints. 
The result of the ASIC as well as FPGA synthesis is the gate-level
netlist. For ASIC designs, the ASIC synthesis tool uses the standard cells,
macros, DW components to have the gate-level netlist. During the FPGA
synthesis, the synthesis tool uses the FPGA resources such as CLBs, IOBs,
DSP blocks, BRAMs, distributed RAM, and hard processor IPs.
Consider the H.264 implementation using ASIC (Fig. 7.1). In such kind of
complex designs the startegy for the FPGA protoype and for the ASIC
design should be decided. The ASIC synthesis and FPGA synthesis will
differ in many ways and will be discussed in few subsequent chapters. 

--- Page 162 ---
Fig. 7.1Top level design of H.264 encoder
The Synopsys Design Compiler (DC) reads the standard cell libraries
and the RTL description to generate the technology-dependent gate-level
netlist. Synthesis is the process of converting the design from the higher
level of abstraction to the lower level of the design abstraction.
The synthesis tool should be efficient enough to optimize the design for
the given constraints. The inputs to the synthesis tool are libraries, RTL
description using, either VHDL or Verilog, and design constraints. The
output from the synthesis tool is gate-level netlist (Fig. 7.2).
Fig. 7.2Synthesis tool inputs and output
The synthesis tool performs many steps during the optimization to
generate the required gate-level netlist, and these steps are described in this
section:
DC reads the DesignWare, technology and symbol libraries to perform
the synthesis. The Synthesis tool is intelligent enough to identify the
components from the DesignWare and technology library. The technology

--- Page 163 ---
library consists of the logic gates, flip-flops, and latches. The complex
components like comparators, adders, multipliers are part of the
DesignWare library. By using these components efficiently either from the
DesignWare or technology library the DC performs the synthesis to
generate the gate-level netlist.
In the next step, the DC reads the RTL either written in the VHDL or
Verilog and proceeds to the next step where it can map to the link library if
it is in the gate-level form. The synthesis tool performs the optimization of
the RTL before mapping the cells to the technology or target library.
The synthesis tool uses the design constraints such as area, speed,
power, and the environmental constraints while performing synthesis. The
constraints are design specific and need to be specified for the desired or
required outcome of the design.
The main important point is that the RTL design and the synthesis team
should know about the target standard cell library so that the design can be
optimized to get the required functional outcome.
In the practical environment, while using the Synopsys DC always care
should be taken about required constraints those are mainly the area, speed,
and power. There are many designs in which the restriction is on the overall
area utilization. For the million gate design, synthesis and optimization is
iterative process as it requires the efficient design partitioning and even the
tight constraints to get the desired performance. For complex ASIC designs,
the RTL design, synthesis, and STA teams work closely to realize the
intended design functionality for the given constraints.
Following are the important steps during synthesis using Synopsys DC:
1. Read standard cell libraries  
2. Read Netlist  
3. Map to link library  
4. Apply design constraints  
5. Map and optimize for the target library 

--- Page 164 ---
6. Write optimized netlist.  
7.3 Synthesis Using Design Compiler (DC)
Synopsys Design Compiler (DC) is powerful synthesis tool used by leading
industries to perform the logic synthesis. This section discusses the
important DC commands used during logic synthesis
1. DC setup and environment: 
After invoking the Synopsys Design Compiler, it reads the start-up file
from the current working directory. The start-up file is synopsys_dc.setup.
There should be two start-up files: one should be in the current working
directory, and another should be in the root directory where the Design
Compiler is installed. To use the tool, the following important parameters
need to be setup.
1. search_path: This parameter is used to search for the synthesis
technology library as reference during synthesis.  
2. target_library: This parameter is used by the DC while mapping the
logic cells during synthesis. The target library consists of the logic
cells.
 
3. symbol_library: All the logic cells have symbolical representation
used for the visualization after synthesis. This parameter is used to pint
the library that contains the visual information for the logic cells
present in the technology synthesis library.
 
4. link_library: The tool uses the cells from the target_library for
mapping the desired functionality, this parameter is used to pint to the
reference of the logic gates in the synthesis technology library.
 
The above four parameters for .synopsys_dc.setup are described by
using following:
set search_path “./synopsys/libraries/syn/cell_library/syn”

--- Page 165 ---
set target_library “tcbn65lpwc.db, tcbn65lpbc.db”
set link_library “$target_library $symbol_library”
set symbol_library “standard.sldb dw_foundation.sldb”
Once the above variable or parameters are set up for the target library
then the synthesis tool can be invoked by using the command prompt.
2. Design Objects: The design objects are described in the following
table and used during synthesis. Every design is the description of the
logic circuit to perform some of the logical operations. The design can
be single system description or can consist of the multiple sub-systems.
The design objects are described in the Table 7.1.
Table 7.1Design objects used by synthesis tool
Design
object
Description
Cell Cell is also called as instance. The instantiated name of the sub-design is called
as cell
ReferenceIt is original design to which cell or instance refers. For example, instantiated
sub-design must refer to the design which consists of the functional description
of the sub-design
Ports The primary inputs and outputs or IO’s of the design are called as ports
Pins The primary inputs, outputs, and IO’s of cells in the design are called as pins
Net Wires used for the connection between ports of the pins of the different designs
are called as net
Clock The input port or pin used as clock source is called as clock
Library The technology-specific cells used for targeting for synthesis, linking or for
reference are called as library
 
As stated in Chap. 2, frequently used DC commands are listed in
Table 7.2.
Table 7.2Important DC commands [1]
Command Description
read-format <format_type> <filename> Read the design
analyze –format <format_type> <list of file
names>
Analyze the design for the syntax errors and
translation before building the generic logic

--- Page 166 ---
Command Description
elaborate –format <list of module names>Used to elaborate the design
check_design To check the design problems like shorts, open,
multiple connections, and instantiations with no
connections
create_clock –name <clock_name> -period 
<clock_period> <clock_pin_names>
Create the clock for the design
set_clock_skew –rise_delay 
<rising_clock_skew> <clock_name>
Define the clock skew for the design
set_input_delay –clock <clock_names> 
<input_delay> <input_port>
To set the input port delay
set_output_delay –clock <clock_names> 
<output_delay> <output_port>
To set the output port delay
compile –map_effort <map_effort_level> To compile with the low, medium or high map effort
level
write –format <format_type> output 
<file_name>
To save the output generated by the synthesis tool
set_false_path –from [get_ports <port list>] –
to get_ports <port list>]
To set the false path
set_multicycle_path – setup <period> -from
[get_cells] –to [get_cells[
To push the setup for the design having multicycle
path
set_multicycle_path –hold <period> -from
[get_cells] –to [get_cells[
To push the hold for the design having multicycle
path
set_clock_uncertainty To define the estimated network skew
set_clock_latency To define the estimated source and network latency
set_clock_transition Define the estimated clock skew
set_dont_touch Used to prevent the optimization of the mapped
gates
7.4 DC Commands Used During Synthesis
The design is described using VHDL or Verilog languages using the
synthesizable constructs. This design is used as one of the inputs by DC.
Table 7.3 describes the important commands used by DC to analyze,
elaborate, and read the design.
Table 7.3Commands used to read the design

--- Page 167 ---
Command Description
read –format
<format_type>
<filename>
The command is used to read the design. For example, designer need to read
the design processor.vhd then following is the command
read-format vhdl processor.vhd
analyze –format 
<format_type> <list
of file names>
Used to analyze the design for the syntax errors and also for the translation
before building the generic logic. The generic logic is part of the Synopsys
generic technology independent library. The components are named as
GTECH. This logic is unmapped representation of the boolean functions.
Following is the command
analyze –format vhdl processor_top.vhd
elaborate –format
<list of module
names>
Used to elaborate the design and can be used to specify the different
architectures during elaboration for the same analyzed design. The
command can be
elaborate –library work processor_top
7.4.1 DC Commands to Read the Design
1. The analyze and elaborate commands are used in order to pass required
parameters while elaborating the design.  
2. Using analyze and elaborate commands, the different architectures can
be specified during elaboration for the same analyzed design. 
3. The read command is used while entering for the pre-compiled designs
or netlists in DC.  
4. The read command does not allow the use of the different architectures. 
7.4.2 DC Commands to Check the Design
After the design has been read by the DC, the check_design is used to check
the issues in the design. Table 7.4 describes the command used to check the
errors in the design.
Table 7.4Command used to check the design
CommandDescription
check_designUsed to check the design problems like shorts, opens, multiple connections, and
instantiations with the no connections
check_design

--- Page 168 ---
7.4.2.1 DC Command to Define Clock
The clock is defined using the create_clock command. Table 7.5 describes
the clock definition commands.
Table 7.5Commands for clock definition
Command Description
create_clock –name
<clock_name>-period 
<clock_period>
<clock_pin_name>
Used to create the clock for the design and used as reference during
timing analysis. The clock is always associated with the clock pin of
the design. If design does not have clock then it will be treated as
virtual clock. For example, the following command can be used to
generate 500 MHz clock with 50% duty cycle is
create_clock –name clock -period 2 master_clock
If designer wishes to use the clock for variable duty cycle with rising
edge at 1 ns and clock period of 5 ns, then the same command can be
modified as
create_clock –name clock - period 5 –waveform {1,5} –name
master_clock
If the design does not have the clock pin, then the virtual clock is created
using the following commands.
This command generates virtual clock of frequency 200 MHz with 50%
duty cycle.
create_clock –name clock -period 5
This command generates virtual clock of frequency 200 MHz. with
variable duty cycle with rising edge at 1 ns and falling edge at 5 ns.
create_clock –name clock -period 5 –waveform {1,5}
7.4.3 DC Commands to Define Skew
The skew is difference between arrivals of the clock edges at various pins
of the flip-flop.
Positive Clock Skew: If clock at the destination flip-flop is delayed with
reference to the source flip-flop, then the skew is called as positive clock
skew and useful for the setup. The reason being, as clock at destination flip-
flop is delayed and due to that it allows that much additional time margin
for the design.

--- Page 169 ---
Negative Clock Skew: If clock at the source flip-flop is delayed with
reference to the destination flip-flop, then the skew is called as negative
clock skew and useful for the hold.
The Design Compiler will not be able to synthesize the clock tree so to
overcome the problem the clock skew is used to model the propagation
delay that exists in the clock tree.
Table 7.6 describes the commands used by DC while defining clock
skew for the design.
Table 7.6Commands used for the skew definitions
Command Description
set_clock_skew –rise_delay <rising_clock_skew>-
fall_delay <falling_clock_skew> <clock_name>
This command is used to define the clock
skew for the design. This can be described as
set_clock_skew –rise_delay 2 – fall_delay
1 master_clock
7.4.4 DC Commands to Specify Input and Output Delay
To specify the input and output delays use the set_input_delay and
set_output_delay commands, respectively. Table 7.7 describes the command
used with the required parameter definition.
Table 7.7Commands used for the input, output delay definitions
Command Description
set_input_delay –clock 
<clock_name> <input_delay>
<input_port>
Used to define the input port delay with reference to the
clock. To define 1 ns delay with reference to clock, the
command can be used as
set_input_delay –clock master_clock 1 data_in
set_output_delay –clock 
<clock_name> <output_delay>
<output_port>
Used to define the output port delay with reference to the
clock. To define 1 ns delay with reference to clock, the
command can be used as
set_output_delay –clock master_clock 1 data_out
7.4.5 DC Commands to Specify Minimum (Min) and
Maximum (Max) Delay
The input and output delays can be specified as min or max depending on
design requirements. Table 7.8 describes the min and max delay definitions.
Table 7.8Commands used for min, max IO delay definitions

--- Page 170 ---
Command Description
set_input_delay –clock
<clock_name>-max <delay>
<input_port>
Used to define the max input port delay with reference to the
clock. To define 2 ns delay with reference to clock, the
command can be used as
set_input_delay –clock master_clock –max 2 data_in
set_input_delay –clock
<clock_name>-min <delay>
<input_port>
Used to define the min input port delay with reference to the
clock. To define 1 ns delay with reference to clock, the
command can be used as
set_input_delay –clock master_clock –min 1 data_in
set_output_delay –clock
<clock_name>-max <delay>
<output_port>
Used to define the max output port delay with reference to the
clock. To define 2 ns delay with reference to clock, the
command can be used as
set_output_delay –clock master_clock –max 2 data_out
set_output_delay –clock
<clock_name>-min <delay>
<output_port>
Used to define the min output port delay with reference to the
clock. To define 1 ns delay with reference to clock, the
command can be used as
set_output_delay –clock master_clock –min 1 data_out
7.4.6 Command Used to Perform Synthesis
Using the command compile the design synthesis is performed, prior to
synthesis the design constraints need to be specified. The design can be
synthesized for the different efforts levels like low, medium, and high.
Table 7.9 describes the compile command.
Table 7.9Command used for compiling the design
Command Description
compile –map_effort 
<map_effort_level>
This command is used to perform the design synthesis with different
effort levels like low, medium, and high. The command for the
medium effort level can be
compile –map_effort medium
7.4.7 DC Command to Save the Design
To save the synthesis output the write command is used. This command can
save the output in the various formats specified by Design Compiler. The
format can be VHDL or database format (ddc).
Table 7.10 describes the command used to save the design.
Table 7.10Command used to save the gate-level netlist

--- Page 171 ---
Command Description
write –format 
<format_type>-output 
<file_name>
This command is used to save the output generated by synthesis tool
in the various formats. For the VHDL format the command can be
write –format vhdl -output processor_netlist.vhd
7.5 Design Optimization Constraints and Basic
Script
The design constraints such as area speed and power need to be met, and
this section discusses about few of the Synopsys DC commands used while
constraining the ASIC designs.
Following steps are performed by synthesis tool:
1. Synthesis tool reads the DesignWare libraries, technology, and symbol
libraries.  
2. Second step is to read the RTL described by Verilog.  
3. Perform the optimization to map the logic using the technology library
that is also called as target library.  
4. Use the design constraints like area, speed, and power and perform the
optimization.  
5. Map the design to target library and optimize the design.  
6. Finally, write the optimized netlist in the (.vhd) or (.ddc) format. 
The sample design constraint script is given below.
Example 1: Basic clk.src Script for 1 GHz Design
/*set the clock*/
set clock clk
/* set clock period */
set clock_period 1

--- Page 172 ---
/* set the latency */
set latency 0.025
/* set clock skew*/
set early_clock_skew [expr $ clock_period/10.0]
set late_clock_skew [expr $ clock_period/20.0]
/* set clock transition */
set clok_transition [expr $ clock_period/100.0]
/* set the external delay*/
set external_delay [expr $ clock-period*0.2]
/* define clock uncertainty */
set clock_uncertainty –setup $ early_clock_skew
set clock_uncertainty –hold $ late_clock_skew
Use the above script as clk.src and to generate the reports use the following
commands.
Example 2: Report Generation Commands
Dc_shell> report_timing
Dc_shell> report_clock
Dc_shell> report_constraints-all_violators
The timing report for the setup check is shown in Report 1. As shown in the
report, the set up slack which is difference between the data required time
and data arrival time is positive. This slack is met, and hence design does
not have any timing violation.
Report 1: Timing report for the setup analysis

--- Page 173 ---
7.6 Clock Network Latency
If we consider any ASIC or SOC chip, then the clock network latency and
clock distribution decides the performance of any synchronous design. The
PLL is used as clock source, and during STA, it is essential to define the
clock source and clock network latency. Figure 7.3 shows both the
latencies.

--- Page 174 ---
Fig. 7.3Clock network latency
7.7 Generated Clock
The generated clocks in the ASIC or SOC can be used as clocking source to
the sequential blocks. The clocks are generated by using the clock divider
networks. Figure 7.4 shows the generated clock using the clock divider. The
useful Synopsys PT commands are described in Table 7.11.
Fig. 7.4Generated clock
Table 7.11 Clock and generated clock commands
Command Description
create_clock –period 10 waveform {0 5} [get_ports
clk_PLL]
Used to define clock having period 10 nsec.
The rising edge at 0 nsec and falling edge at
5 nsec
create_generated_clock –name CLK_DIV_2 –source
UPLL0/clkout –divide_by 2 [get_pins UFF0/Q]
Generated clock CLK_DIV_2 at q
7.8 Clock Muxing and False Paths

--- Page 175 ---
Most of the times, we need to have clock multiplexing. The minimum and
maximum frequency clocks can be used in the design depending on the
design requirements. During the ASIC testing, the minimum
frequency clock can be used. The false paths between these clocks need to
be reported to the timing analyzer. To set the false path, use the command
shown in Table 7.12 (Fig. 7.5).
Table 7.12Commands to specify false path
Command Description
set_false_path –from [get_clock Tclk_max] –to
[get_clocks Tclk_min]
Used to set the false path between the
Tclk_max and Tclk_min
set_false_path –through [get_pins
UMUX/clk_select]
To set the false path with respect to
clk_select
Fig. 7.5Clock muxing and false path
7.9 Clock Gating
The clock gating checks need to be performed by the timing analyzer and
the command is described in Table 7.13 (Fig. 7.6).
Table 7.13Clock gating checks commands
Command Description
create_clock –period 10 [get_ports System_CLK]To create the system clock of
period 10 nsec
create_generated_clock –name –divide_by 1 System_CLK [get
pins UAND1/Z]
To get the same clock CLK_gate

--- Page 176 ---
Fig. 7.6Clock Gating
7.10 Multicycle Paths
The multicycle paths in the design need to be reported. The paths can be set
so that the timing analyzer can perform the setup and hold check (Fig. 7.7).
Fig. 7.7Multicycle path
The commands used to set the multicycle path are listed in Table 7.14.
Table 7.14Multicycle path commands
Command Description
create_clock –name clk_master -period 5
[get_ports clk_master]
To create the master clock of period 5 nsec
set_multicycle_path 3 –setup –from [get_pins
UFFO/Q] –to [get_pins UFF1/D]
This set the multicycle path of 3 cycles
set_multicycle_path 2 –hold –from [get_pins
UFFO/Q] –to [get_pins UFF1/D]
This is used to move the hold check to second
clock cycles as setup is checked at third clock
cycles

--- Page 177 ---
7.11 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
The following are important points to conclude the chapter:
1. Synthesis is process of translating design from higher level of
abstractions to lower level of abstractions.  
2. Synopsys DC is powerful synthesis tool and used for logic synthesis. 
3. The synthesis tool uses the libraries, RTL design, and constraints
during the synthesis.  
4. The outcome of synthesis is gate-level netlist and used during pre-
layout STA.  
5. The synthesis team members should work on the block-level synthesis
and top-level synthesis.  
6. DC gives highest priority to optimize for the speed as compare to
the area.  
7. DC performs the design optimization to meet the constraints during
synthesis.  
8. If design constraints are not met, then the performance improvement
techniques at synthesis, RTL, and architecture level should be used. 
9. During synthesis phase, report the false paths and multicycle paths. 
This chapter has given us basic understanding about the frequently used
DC commands and how to use them. The next chapter discusses about
the design optimization using Synopsys DC and the details about how to
achieve the desired goal during synthesis.
Reference
1. www. synopsys. com.

--- Page 178 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 179 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_8
8. Design Optimization
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“Synopsys DC is the efficient EDA tool and can be used for the
design optimization and synthesis.”
Abstract
The chapter discusses the design rule constraints and optimization
constraints used during the ASIC synthesis. The goal of this chapter is to
have understanding of the important DC commands and how they play the
important role during synthesis. The chapter also discusses about the
important design scenarios which may encounter during the ASIC
synthesis.
KeywordsASIC – DRC – Optimization – Fanout – Capacitance –
Transition – Max – Min – STA – Timing paths – Multicycle paths –
Constraints—chip-level constraints – Block-level constraints – False path –
FSM – Area – Speed – Power – Static power – Dynamic power
8.1 ASIC Synthesis and Design Constraints
During the design cycle which kicks off from the market survey to the
layout, we experience many challenges in each phase. The complex SOC
designs for the required process node need to meet the design constraints.

--- Page 180 ---
These constraints are mainly “Design Rule Constraints (DRC)” and
“Optimization Constraints”. So, it is very much required for the synthesis
team to understand the constraints at block, top and chip level. Depending
on the requirement of the speed, area, and power, the block-level and top-
level constraints can be extracted. Our objective in this chapter is to have
understanding of the optimization constraints and DRC.
To have better clarity about the synthesis, constraints, and optimization,
let us consider the top-level design which has complexity of almost around
200,000 logic cells.
As shown in Fig. 8.1 the multiple functional blocks are integrated at top
level. These blocks may be partitioned as
Fig. 8.1Top-level design of SOC

--- Page 181 ---
(1)Processing logic: The partition 1 which is  grouping of
functional blocks mainly processor, DSP logic, and Internal memory.  
(2)Controller and memory logic: The partition II can be the memory
controller and high-speed interfaces  
(3)IO and other interfaces: The third partition can be parallel and serial
IO  
(4)Test and Control logic: The fourth partition can be the test and
control logic for the SOC.  
By considering this, the block-level and top-level constraints can be
extracted depending on the speed, power, and area requirement for the
target process node.
Important steps to compile the design are shown in the Script 1
Script 1: Script to Compile the Design
/* read the design object */
read -format vhdl soc_top.vhd
/* specify the technology requirements */
target_library = my_library.db
symbol_library = my_library.sdb
link_library = ”*” + target_library
/* define the design environment */
set_load < value >< input_port>
.
.
.
set_load < value >< input_port>
set_driving_cell -cell FD1 all_inputs()
set_drive 0 clk_name
/* set the design constraints */
set_input_delay < value >-clock clk {< list of inputs >}
.
.
.

--- Page 182 ---
set_input_delay < value >-clock clk {< list of inputs >}
set_max_area 0
/* Perform the design synthesis*/
compile
/* generates reports */
report_constraint
report_area
/* save the design database */
write -format db -hierarchy -output soc_top.db
Important commands for the optimization and DRC are described in
Table 8.1 and these commands are used during next few sections.
Table 8.1Synopsys command for the optimization and DRC
Command Type Description
set_max_transition DRC Used to define the largest transition time
set_max_fanout DRC Used to set the largest fanout for the design
set_max_capacitanceDRC Used to set the maximum capacitance allowed
for the design
set_min_capacitanceDRC Used to set the minimum capacitance allowed
for the design
set_operating_conditionsOptimization
constraints
Used to set the PVT conditions as it affects on
timing
set_load Optimization
constraints
Used to model load on output port
set_clock_uncertaintyOptimization
constraints
Used to define the estimated network skew
set_clock_latency Optimization
constraints
Used to define the estimated source and network
delays
set_clock_transition Optimization
constraints
Used to define the estimated input skew
set_max_dynamic_
power
Power constraintsUsed to set the maximum dynamic power
set_max_leakage_ powerPower constraintsUsed to set the maximum leakage power
set_max_total_ powerPower constraintsUsed to set the maximum total power
set_dont_touch Optimization
constraints
It is used to prevent the optimization of mapped
gates

--- Page 183 ---
8.1.1 Block-Level Synthesis and Constraints
The block-level constraints to meet the desired area, speed, and the power
are specified using the tcl’tk commands.
Why it is essential to specify the block-level constraints is one of the
common questions? The few important points are listed below:
1. The complex SOC or ASIC designs can have the multiple functional
blocks and may have multiple clock domains, power domains, and the
functionality.
 
2. For the better optimization; the functionality of the design is partitioned
into the multiple domains to achieve the speed, area, and power
requirements, the design and optimization constraints need to be
specified.
 
3. Consider the design having four partitions as discussed earlier. The
operating frequency of the partition I is 500 MHz, partition II operates
at 333.33 MHz, partition III at 200 MHz, and the partition IV operates
at the frequency of 250 MHz. Other glue logic and buses operates at the
frequency of 150 MHz, and the design is partitioned into five clock
domains. In such circumstances, the design constraints to achieve the
required speed, power, and area are specified in the block-level
constraints.sdc file.
 
4. What exactly the synthesis tool does is, it uses the RTL design,
constraints and try to generate the gate-level netlist for these functional
blocks. The synthesis tools are intelligent enough as they go through
the various optimization phases to meet the constraints.
 
5. At the block level, if constraints are not met, then it is essential to
modify the RTL or tweak the architecture and it can have very good
impact on the later stages of the design.
 
6. This phase can even be helpful to understand and freeze the risks in the
design.  
Script 2: The Block-Level Synthesis Using Synopsys DC [1]

--- Page 184 ---
set active_design proceesor_functionality
analyze –format vhdl $active_design.vhd
elaborate $active_design
current_design $active_design
link
uniquify
set_wire_load_model –name SMALL
set_wire_load_mode top
set_operating_conditions WORST
create_clock –period 10 –waveform [list 0 5] matser_clk
set_clock_latency 1.0 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_uncertainty –setup 2.0 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_transition 0.1 [get_clocks tck]
set_dont_touch_network [list tck master_reset]
set_driving_cell –cell BUFF1X –pin Z [all_inputs]
set_drive 0 [list master_clk master_reset]
set_input_delay 2.0 –clock master_clk –max [all_inputs]
set_output_delay 2.0 –clock master_clk –max [all_outputs]
set_max_area 0
set_fix_multiple_port_nets –buffer_constants –all
compile –scan
check_test
remove_unconnected_ports [find –hierarchy cell {“*”}]
change_names –h –rules
set_dont_touch current_design
write–hierarchy –output $active_design.db
write–format vhdl –hierarchy –output $active_design.vhd
8.1.2 Chip-Level Synthesis and Constraints
At the top level, the design is integration of the different functional blocks,
IPs, and processors. The top-level constraints need to be derived depending
on the requirement of the speed, power, and area. At the initial stages of the
design cycle, during the architecture level, the information about this is
gathered and documented.
For example, my SOC design should work at 1 GHz operating
frequency and has the multiple clock domains. So, is it essential that every

--- Page 185 ---
functional block need to be operated at the 1 GHz? Answer is no! The
reason being the overall clocking rate to perform the single operation in one
cycle is 1 GHz and as the design have multiple functional blocks depending
on the partition, they can be operated individually at high speed or at low
speed also.
The architect and the design team should take care of the
synchronization for such designs. For the functional and timing proven IPs,
it can be possible to set the don’t touch attributes during the iterative phase
of synthesis and optimization.
Script 3: Top-Level Constraints Script Using Synopsys [1]
set active_design processor
set sub_modules {processor_logic decoding bus interface memory interrupt_control}
foreach module $sub_modules {
set syn_db $module.db
read_db syn_db
}
analyze –format vhdl $active_design.vhd
elaborate $active_design
current–design $active_design
link
uniquify
set_wire_load_model –name LARGE
set_wire_load_mode enclosed
set_operating_conditions WORST
create_clock – period 10 –waveform [list 0 5] master_clk
set_clock_latency 1.0 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_uncertainty –setup 2.0 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_transition 0.1 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_dont_touch_network [list master_clk master_reset]
set_driving_cell –cell BUFF1X –pinZ [all_inputs]
set_drive 0 [list master_clk master-reset]
set_input_delay 2.0–clock master_clk –max [all_inputs]
set_output_delay 2.0–clock master_clk –max [all_outputs]
set_max_area 0
set_fix_multiple_port_nets –all –buffer_constants

--- Page 186 ---
compile –scan
remove_attribute [find –hierarchy design {“*”}] dont_touch
current_design $active_design
uniquify
check_test
create_test_patterns –sample 5
preview_scan
insert_scan
check_test
compile –only_design_rule
remove_unconnected_ports [find –hierarchy cell {“*”}]
set_dont_touch current_design
write –hierarchy –output $active_design.db
write–format vhdl –hierarchy –output $active_design.vhd
8.2 Design Rule Constraints (DRC)
The main important design rule constraints are fanout, capacitance, and
transition. These constraints are having high priority during the synthesis as
compared to optimization constraints.
8.2.1 max_fanout
It is used to measure the number of loads a port or load can drive.
Consider the logic gate driving the multiple gates as shown in Fig. 8.2.

--- Page 187 ---
Fig. 8.2fanout of the cell
The technology library has information about the default fanout.
Designer can use the following command to get the fanout
get_attribute library_name default_fanout_load
8.2.2 max_transition
The maximum transition from ‘0’ to ‘1’ or from ‘1’ to ‘0’ for specific net or
entire design can be specified using Synopsys DC, as we know the
transition time is due to the RC time constant.
How DC meets the specified maximum transition?
Consider the library which specifies maximum transition of ‘4’ and designer
specifies max_transition of ‘2’. What DC does is that, it will try to meet the
max_transition of 2 (Fig. 8.3).

--- Page 188 ---
Fig. 8.3Transition from ‘0’ to ‘1’ and ‘1’ to ‘0’
The following Synopsys DC command is used to specify the
max_transition (Fig. 8.4).
Fig. 8.4Capacitance at driving cell
set_max_transition < value >< design_name/port_name >
8.2.3 max_capacitance
It is used to provide information about the maximum net capacitance.
During the compilation, the DC takes care about the violations due to
max_capacitance.

--- Page 189 ---
So, as we know the max_capacitance constraint at output of driving cell
is due to the net capacitance and the capacitance of pins driven by cell,
designer can use the following command to define max_capacitance.
set_max_capacitance < value >< port_name/design_name>
As discussed, use the following commands to define the design rule
constraints
set_max_transition < value >< design_name/port_name >
set_max_fanout < value >< port_name/design_name >
set_max_capacitance < value >< design_name/port_name>
8.3 Optimization Constraints
For the design optimization, during the logic synthesis, the DC uses the area
and speed constraints. Both the constraints should be met. The power
management and power constraints for ASIC design will be considered
during physical synthesis.
So, let us try to understand how the DC performs the optimization? Is it
that the DC will try to perform the optimization for the area and speed at the
same time? The answer is ‘no’, the reason being if I am the designer and I
wish to have the optimization then I will try to carry optimization of the
design to achieve desired speed. So, the speed optimization is carried out
first and then DC will optimize for the area.
As discussed in Chap. 7, DC uses few of the commands while
constraining the design and these commands are
create_clock
set_input_delay
set_output_delay
set_max_delay
set_min_delay
set_fix_hold
set_max_area
set_driving_cell

--- Page 190 ---
set_load
For the asynchronous path, the point-to-point delays are specified by the
following commands.
set_max_delay
set_min_delay
The following section discusses the DC commands used during the
optimization and during the performance improvement of the design.
8.3.1 set_dont_use
The command ‘set_dont_use’ can be used, if the synthesis engineer wish
not to refer the cells from the technology library.
If ‘don’t_touch’ attribute is used then this command ignores the cells
from the technology library.
The command is described below
set_dont_use library_name/cell_name
Consider cell name as XOR2 then during the optimization the XOR2
cell is not used.
8.3.2 set_dont_touch
Most of the time, during the optimization phase, we don’t need to optimize
the design which has already met the timing and area constraints. For
example, consider the design shown in the Fig. 8.5.

--- Page 191 ---
Fig. 8.5SOC top-level design diagram
If the functional design blocks such as processor, DSP logic, and
memory controller have met the timing and area constraints and as further
optimization is not required, the dont_touch command can be used.
The command is described below
set_dont_touch design_name
This we can prevent the synthesis reoptimization of the design
functionality.
During logic synthesis, we need to use the hand instantiated clock trees
and as DC doesn’t perform the synthesis for the clock tree, use the
don’t_touch attribute for the same.
So, if current design is soc_top, then we can do following to allow don’t
touch of the functional block
current_design = soc_top

--- Page 192 ---
set_dont_touch u1
set_dont_touch u2
set_dont_touch u3
Where the u1, u2, and u3 are the instances of the processor, DSP logic,
and memory controller, respectively.
8.3.3 set_prefer
This command is used when the synthesis engineer wish to change the
priority of cells chosen by the DC during technology translation.
Now, consider that the design netlist need to be mapped to another
technology library then the command can be used and is described below
set_prefer library_name/libaray_name
8.3.4 Command for the Design Flattening
We can have the hierarchical or flattened design. Now, consider the
following expressions used inside the architecture of VHDL design
Y1 <= a_in and b_in;
Y2 <= c_in and Y1;
The synthesis tool will infer the cascade logic and shown in the Fig. 8.6.
Fig. 8.6Gate-level structure without flattening
After flattening, we can get the expression as
Y2 <= (c_in and a_in) and (c_in and b_in);
set_flatten command is used to flatten the design.
The command is described as or may be referred as the switch
set_flatten true
If we refer the basic digital circuits, then the combinational logic is
expressed using sum of product (sop). The SOP expression will improve the

--- Page 193 ---
parallelism and the speed of the design.
Now let us think that can I use flattening for the multiplexers, XOR gates
and adders?
The answer is, it is not recommended to use flattening for this type of logic
due to the use of the control elements. During optimization, the DC will
never perform flattening unless and until it is specified.
Still there is always limitation to get the flattened netlist. It is
recommended that if the design has 10 or less number of inputs, then the
flatten switch can be used.
8.3.5 Commands Used for Structuring
If the objective is to improve the area or gate count, then structuring is
recommended.
The command is described below
set_structure –timing true
We can have the Boolean structuring or timing driven structuring. By
default, the DC uses the timing driven structuring. To execute the Boolean
structuring, we need to direct the synthesis tool.
8.3.6 Group and Ungroup Commands
To remove the hierarchy, the ‘ungroup’ command is used, and to create the
hierarchy, the ‘group’ command is used.
The command is described below
ungroup –flatten –all
This will allow ungrouping of all the levels below soc_top design. But
DC will take care that the design functionality for which the set_dont_touch
attribute was applied will not be disturbed.
To ungroup all the synthetic designs before compiling, the following
command can be used
replace_synthetic –ungroup
To group command can be used to have the new hierarchy. The command is
given below
Group (u1, u2) –design_name name_block –cell_name soc_top_inst

--- Page 194 ---
So as discussed the grouping forms the new instance soc_top_inst using the
instances u1, u2.
8.4 FSM Optimization
For the optimization of the finite state machines, the FSM compiler is used.
The use of FSM compiler is to achieve the area optimization with the
improved design performance. In the practical ASIC designs, the state
machine controller is designed as separate design block.
More details are given in the Chap. 6 about the Moore and Mealy state
machine.
The Script 4 can be used for the FSM extraction and optimization
Script 4: FSM Extraction Script
/* read the design object */
dc_shell > read -format vhdl state_machines_controller.vhd
/* Map the design */
dc_shell > compile –map_effort medium
/* if the design is not partitioned then group the logic */
dc_shell > set_fsm_state_vector {< flip_flop_name > , < flip_flop_name > ,…}
dc_shell > group –fsm –design_name < fsm_design_name>
/* extract the state machine from netlist in the state machine table format */
dc_shell > set_fsm_state_vector {< flip_flop_name > , < flip_flop_name > ,…}
dc_shell > set_fsm_encoding {“state0 = 0”, “state1 = 1”, …….}
dc_shell > extract
/* write the design in the FSM format */
dc_shell > write –format st –output state_machine.st
/* if the design is already in the state machine format then read the design */
dc_shell > read –format st state_machine.st
/* define the order of the state */
dc_shell > set_fsm_order {state0,state1,….}
/* define the encoding style */
dc_shell > set_fsm_encoding_style < encoding_style>
/* compile the design */
dc_shell > compile –map_effort high

--- Page 196 ---
8.5 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Following are important points to conclude the chapter
1. Synopsys DC uses the optimization constraints and design rule
constraints while performing synthesis.  
2. For complex designs, extract the chip-level, top-level, and block-level
constraints.  
3. The design rule constraints are specified for the fanout, transition, and
capacitance.  
4. Optimization constraints are specified for the area and speed. 
5. Synopsys DC does not optimize for the power. The power planning
need to be carried out during physical design.  
6. To report the area, use report_area and use report_timing to get the
timing report.  
7. Grouping is used to create new design hierarchy.  
8. Design flattening removes the hierarchy from the design. 
9. FSM optimization can be carried out using FSM compiler.  
This chapter has given us good understanding of the optimization and
design rule constraints. Even we have discussed about the DRC
commands and optimization commands. The next chapter will discuss
about the important ASIC synthesis optimization and performance
improvement strategies. Even the chapter will discuss about the area,
timing reports and scripts used for the setup and hold checks!
Reference

--- Page 197 ---
1. www. springer. com: “Advanced HDL Synthesis and SOC Prototyping: Vaibbhav Taraate”.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 198 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_9
9. Design Optimization Scenarios
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“Synopsys DC gives highest priority to optimize for timing as
compared to area optimization.”
Abstract
The chapter discusses the design optimization strategies to achieve the
speed and area constraints during synthesis using Synopsys DC. Most of the
time, we observe the timing violations and DRC violations. To optimize the
design to meet the constraints, the schemes which are used during synthesis
and optimization are discussed in this chapter. The chapter even discusses
the use of Synopsys DC commands to report the multicycle path and false
path and to perform the register balancing and register retiming.
KeywordsASIC – Synthesis – Optimization – False path – Setup – Hold –
Max area – STA – Timing paths – Multicycle paths – Constraints’ chip-level
constraints – Block-level constraints – FSM optimization – Area – Speed –
Power – Static power – Dynamic power – Group – Asynchronous paths –
Setup slack – Hold slack
9.1 Where Is the Issue in Optimization?

--- Page 199 ---
At the higher level, we can imagine that design constraints are not met for
the SOC design. There are many reasons behind this. What they may be?
1. The design logic density is so high that the top-level design is not able
to meet the area constraints.  
2. The design has many timing paths which are failing at the top level.
That is the design is not able to meet the timing constraints. 
3. The block-level design does not have any timing violation but when
integrated at the top level the top-level constraints are not met. 
4. The design at top level has only hold violations, but there is no any
issue for the setup time. Better to work on the setup violations during
prelayout STA and during physical design fix the hold violations.
 
5. My design is meeting all the constraints, but still there is chance to
improve the performance of my design.  
6. If we consider Fig. 9.1, then many times we can face issue of timing
and area for the processor interface with the memory controller and
interface of the video processor with the memory controller. The issue
may be due to the partitioning boundaries or pin-to-pin timing. Or the
partitioning is not proper as all they are in the different  clock groups.
 

--- Page 200 ---
Fig. 9.1SOC top-level design.
Note The discussion on analog design is out of scope for this book. The analog cluster
having different blocks is shown in Fig. 9.1
7. The issue of not meeting the power constraints in this book discussion
on the power constraints is out of scope.  
8. Another issue can be multicycle and false path reporting. If the
multicyle paths and false paths are not reported, then the optimization
is really a big issue.
 
9. If my design uses the state machine controller, consider the state
machine controller for initialization of the DDR3 controller or to
perform the pipelining and control in the general purpose processor. If
the optimization and constraints are not extracted at block level, then
it will be difficult to get the optimization and performance
improvement at the block as well as top level.
 

--- Page 201 ---
10.If my design has the intended latches, then the time borrowing and
working of the design for the active enable window need to be
considered.
 
In all such scenarios, the strategies need to be decided by the synthesis
and optimization team to achieve the clean timing and to meet the design
constraints. Let us have strategy to meet the timing first and then work on
the area constraints.
The design and optimization are vast topics, and I can document
hundreds of scenarios. But this chapter discusses few of the scenarios with
the optimization strategies and performance improvement techniques.
9.2 Design Optimization Strategies for the SOC
Now let us imagine as a synthesis team what should be our strategies during
the design and optimization for the large-density SOCs. The following are
few important points:
1. Have the initial synthesis run for the block-level design and report all
the violators  
2. Have closer look to the timing and area report and then try to apply for
the constraints at the block level. Report the all violated paths by using
the report_constraints –all_violators
 
3. If the improvement in the timing is requirement, then use the
asynchronous path grouping and then use the compilation strategies. 
4. If the large-density blocks have already met the timing then to prevent
the recompilation uses the ‘dont_touch’ attribute.  
5. If the area minimization is requirement, then use grouping, resource
sharing, and other techniques with the ‘set_max_area’ attribute.  
6. Report the multicycle paths in the design. Consider the SOC shown in
Fig. 9.1 which has processor engine and needs the floating point
multiplier. If the destination register is receiving the data after multiple
clock cycles, then it is essential to report the multicycle path. This will
 

--- Page 202 ---
be useful information to the timing analyzer to understand where to
check for the setup and where to check for the hold.
7. Report the false path for the block-level design.  
8. If block-level timing and area requirements are met for the design, then
use the top-level design constraints to optimize the top-level design. 
9. For the top-level optimization, let us imagine that the processor, video
processor, and memory controller individual timing are met but at the
top level there is an issue in meeting the constraints! Then what we
should do?
a. Check for the timing violation from the timing report, the setup
violation is due to the late arrival of the data. So try to tweak the
RTL to get the partition boundary clean.
 
b. If partition boundary is clean, then we can use the register
balancing techniques to eliminate the setup time violation. 
c. If the timing report indicates the hold violations, then it indicates
that at the block interface the data arrival is very fast so we can use
the strategies to append the buffers in the data path by taking care
that it will not have the setup time violation issue.
 
d. After all the possibilities if the timing is not met then try to tweak
the RTL, architecture or last option is to use the relaxed
constraints.
 
 
9.3 Compilation Strategies
We can choose either top-down or bottom-up compilation approach during
the design synthesis. Each compilation method has its own advantages and
disadvantages.
9.3.1 Top-Down Compilation

--- Page 203 ---
The top-down compilation uses the top-level design constraints. The
following are the advantages and disadvantages for the top-down
compilation
Advantages
1. Optimization engines work on full design, complete paths 
2. Usually get best optimization result  
3. No iteration required  
4. Simple constraints  
5. Simple data management.  
Disadvantages
1. Longer runtime  
2. More memory requirements 
3. More runtime.  
The commands used for the top-down compilation are
dc_shell> current_design TOP
dc_shell> compile –timing_high_effort_script
9.3.2 Bottom-up Compilation

--- Page 204 ---
The bottom-up compilation performs the submodule-level compilation first
and then it moves toward top level. The care must be taken by the designer
to set ‘set_dont_touch’ attribute on the submodules to avoid recompilation of
the submodules. The designer needs to know the timing information for the
inputs and outputs for each of the submodule. The advantages and
disadvantages are discussed below.
Advantages
1. Faster as compared to top-down compilation 
2. Less processing required per run  
3. Less memory requirement.  
Disadvantages
1. Optimization works on the submodule or subdesign 
2. More iteration required  
3. More hierarchies to maintain.  
Consider the design has two submodules. The commands used for the
bottom-up compilation are
dc_shell> current_design submodule1
dc_shell> compile –timing_high_effort_script
dc_shell> set_dont_touch submodule1
dc_shell> current_design submodule2
dc_shell> compile –timing_high_effort_script
dc_shell> set_dont_touch submodule2
dc_shell> current_design TOP

--- Page 205 ---
dc_shell> compile –timing_high_effort_script
9.4 Strategies for Area Optimization
There are several techniques used for minimizing the overall area of the
design. The highest priority of the designer is to optimize for the timing and
then for the area. There are several efficient area minimization techniques at
the RTL level. In the previous few chapters, we have discussed resource
sharing using RTL tweaks. This section will give more information about
the area optimization and techniques using Synopsys DC. The following are
the important guidelines used to optimize for the area.
1. Avoid the use of the combinational logic as individual block or design. 
2. Do not use the glue logic between two designs.  
3. Use set_max_area attribute while synthesizing the design.  
9.4.1 Do not Use Combinational Logic as Individual Block
It is recommended that avoid the use of the combinational logic as
individual block. If the individual combinational design block is used, then
Design Compiler will not be able to optimize the individual block. This is
not a good design partitioning. The hierarchy of the module is fixed, and
Design Compiler will not be able to modify the hierarchy of the design.
Consider the scenario shown in Fig. 9.2. It has module I and module II. As
shown the module II is separate combinational block so the Design
Compiler will not be able to optimize module II, the reason being the
Design Compiler doesn’t optimize the port interfaces.

--- Page 206 ---
Fig. 9.2Combinational logic as individual module [2]
If the design is partitioned by considering the boundaries, then the
overall optimization will boost the design performance. A better partitioned
ASIC design should have combined functionality of module I and module
II. The functionality of A + B in the single module I is shown in Fig. 9.3 and
results in the faster optimization for the design.
Fig. 9.3Eliminating individual combinational module
9.4.2 Do not Use Glue Logic Between Two Modules
If the module II in Fig. 9.3 is replaced by glue logic that is instance of logic
gate, then it glues between the different modules and shown in Fig. 9.4.
Such type of design partitioning is not good, the reason being the logic gate
cannot be optimized by the Design Compiler as design is not partitioned

--- Page 207 ---
properly. To avoid this type of scenario, it is recommended to use the group
command. Either group the glue logic in the module I or module II.
The following command is used to group the glue logic into module II
(Fig. 9.4).
Fig. 9.4Glue logic between two blocks
dc_shell> group {m2, m2} –design_name module III cell_name nand_gate
9.4.3 Use of set_max_area Attribute
To obtain the minimum possible area, it is recommended to use the attribute
set_max_area. This attribute is effective during the optimization of the
design. Design Compiler gives the highest priority to the timing
optimization. If timing is met, then only the area optimization phase can
start. The priorities for the design optimization are DRC, timing, power, and
then area.

--- Page 208 ---
9.4.4 Area Report
The area report is generated by the Design Compiler using report_area
command. The sample area report is shown in Report 1. The area report for
any design consists of the number of ports, nets, references. It also gives
information about the combinational, sequential, and total cell area. The
fields of the area report are listed below
Report 1:Area report fields [2]
Number of ports:
Number of nets:
Number of cells:
Number of references:
Combinational area:
Non-combinational area:
Net interconnect area: undefined (Wire load has zero net area)
Total cell area:
Total area:
9.5 Strategies for Timing Optimization and
Performance Improvement
While optimization, the timing has highest priority as compared to the
power and area. We are not using Synopsys DC for the power optimization.
Power planning will be done during later stage using physical compiler.
During the first phase of optimization, the Design Compiler checks for the
design rule constraint (DRC) violations, then the timing violations and the
power constraints and finally the area constraints. This section discusses the
few timing optimization commands supported by the Design Compiler.
9.5.1 Design Compilation with ‘map_effort_high’
Most of the time, design engineer uses the option as map_effort medium
while performing the synthesis. It is advisable that during synthesis of the
first phase, designer can use the option as map_effort medium as it reduces
the compilation time. If the deign constraints are not met, then the designer

--- Page 209 ---
can go for the incremental compilation with the option as map_effort high.
This can improve the design performance by at least 5–10%.
The sdc command is shown below.
dc_shell> compile –map_effort_high –incremental_mapping
9.5.2 Use of group_path Command
The design performance can boost up to 10% by using the map_effort high
option. But if timing is not met with the incremental compilation by using
the design constraints, then it is essential to group the critical timing paths
and use the weight factor to boost the design performance. This command is
useful to improve the timing performance. The command is shown below.
dc_shell> group_path –name critical1 –from <input_name>–to <output_name>–
weight <weight factor>
Consider the design scenario which has the setup violation of 0.38 ns.
The setup violation is difference between the data required time and data
arrival time. So the slack is negative and setup time is violated.
dc_shell> read –format vhdl combinational_design.vhd
dc_shell> create_clock –name clk –period 15
dc_shell> set_input_delay 3 –clock clk in_a
dc_shell> set_input_delay 3 –clock clk in_b
dc_shell> set_input_delay 3 –clock clk c_in
dc_shell> set_output_delay 3 –clock c_out
dc_shell> current_design = combinational_design
dc_shell> compile –map_effort medium
dc_shell> report_timing –path full –delay max –max_path 1 –nworst 1
After the successful design synthesis use the report_timing command
while performing the timing analysis. The timing report for the design can

--- Page 210 ---
be obtained with the multiple options as shown in the above script and
shown in Report 2.


--- Page 211 ---
Report 2Timing report with negative slack
To fix the setup violation and to boost the design performance, the designer
can use the group_path with the weight factor. More the weight factor more
is the compilation time.
dc_shell> group_path –name critical1 –from c_in –to c_out –weight 5
dc_shell> compile –map_effort high –incremental mapping
dc_shell> report_timing –path full –delay max –max_path 1 –nworst 1
As shown in the timing report the design has positive slack as it remove
setup violation and shown in Report 3.

--- Page 212 ---
Report 3Timing report with the positive slack

--- Page 213 ---
As shown in the timing Report 3 for the max analysis with the
compile_map high option, due to weight factor of 5 the slack is met.
9.5.3 Setup Time Analysis and Check
The setup slack is difference between the data required time (RT) and data
arrival time (AT). If setup slack is met means the difference between the RT
and AT is positive. The script using the Synopsys PT commands for setup
time check is described in Script 1.
Script 1: Setup check [1]
set active_design soc_top
read_db –netlist_only $active_design.db
current_design $active_design
set_wire_load_model –name large
set_wire_load_mode top
set_operating_conditions WORST
set_load 40.0 [all_outputs]
set_driving_cell –cell BUFF1X –pinZ [all_inputs]
create_clock –period 10 –waveform [0 5] master_clk
set_clock_latency 1.0 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_transition 0.1 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_uncertainty 2.0 –setup [get_clocks master_clk]
set_input_delay 2.0 –clock master_clk [all_inputs]
set_output_delay 2.0 –clock master_clk [all_outputs]
report_constraint –all_violators
report_timing –to [all_registers –data_pins]
report_timing –to [all_outputs]
write_sdf–context vhdl –output $active_design.sdf
The sample timing report is shown in Report 4. As shown, the difference
between the data required time and data arrival time is positive. This
indicates no timing violation due to positive slack.

--- Page 214 ---
Report 4Timing report for the setup analysis [1].
If slack is not met, then what need to do?
1. Consider the late arrival signals in the data path. 
2. Tweak the RTL.  
3. Tweak the architecture micro-architecture. 
9.5.4 Hold Time Analysis and Check
Hold slack is defined as difference between the data arrival time and data
required time. The slack should be positive that means during the hold time

--- Page 215 ---
window, there is no any transition. The script using the Synopsys PT
commands for hold time check is described in Script 2.
Script 2: Hold time check [1].
set active_design soc_top
read_db –netlist_only $active_design.db
current_design $active_design
set_wire_load large
set_wire_load_mode top
set_operating_conditions BEST
set_load 50.0 [all_outputs]
set_driving_cell –cell BUFF1X –pin Z [all_inputs]
create_clock –period 10 –waveform [0 5] master_clk
set_clock_latency 1.0 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_transition 0.1 [get_clocks master_clk]
set_clock_uncertainty 0.5 –hold [get_clocks master_clk]
set_input_delay 0.0–clock master_clk [all_inputs]
set_output_delay 0.0–clock master_clk[all_outputs]
report_constraint –all_violators
report_timing –to [all_registers –data_pins] –delay_type min
report_timing –to [all_outputs] –delay_type min
write_sdf -context vhdl–output $active_design.sdf
The sample timing report is shown in Report 5. As shown, the difference
between the data arrival time and data required time is positive. This
indicates no timing violation due to positive slack.

--- Page 216 ---
Report 5Timing report for the hold analysis [1].
If slack is not met, then what need to do
1. Consider the early arrival signals in the data path. 
2. Tweak the RTL.  
3. Tweak the architecture, micro-architecture.  
9.5.5 Submodule Characterization
In the practical ASIC designs, the design can have multiple hierarchies.
Consider that the top-level design consists of submodules X, Y, Z. If
independently these submodules are synthesized and optimized for the
design constraints, they might meet the timing requirements independently.
When these submodules are instantiated in the higher level of hierarchy top,

--- Page 217 ---
then it may be possible that they do not meet the timing. The reason for this
may be the glue logic used in between the submodules X, Y, Z or the tight
constraints at the top-level hierarchy.
Under such circumstances to meet the design constraints, it is advisable
to use the characterize command. This command allows the capturing of
the boundary conditions for the submodule based on the top-level hierarchy
environment. Each submodule can be compiled and characterize
independently.
The following is the small script which can enable the characterization
of the individual submodules. Consider the submodule X, Y, Z instance
names as I1, I2, and I3
dc_shell> current_design = TOP
dc_shell> characterize I1
dc_shell> compile –map_effort high –incremental mapping
dc_shell> current_design = TOP
dc_shell> characterize I2
dc_shell> compile –map_effort high –incremental mapping
dc_shell> current_design = TOP
dc_shell> characterize I3
dc_shell> compile –map_effort high –incremental mapping
dc_shell> current_design = TOP
9.5.6 Register Balancing
Register balancing is very efficient and powerful technique to move the
combinational logic from one pipelined stage to another pipelined stage.
This technique improves the design performance by moving the logic and
hence reduces the register to register delay. Consider the pipelined design
shown in Fig. 9.5 and consisting of the three flip-flops and combinational
logic. In the first pipelined stage, the combinational logic is 4-variable
function and the second pipelined stage has combinational logic as 8-
variable function and has more propagation delay as compared to the 4-
variable combinational logic. Due to the different propagation delay in two
different pipelined stages, the design performance is decided by the register
to register timing path which has more delay.

--- Page 218 ---
Fig. 9.5Pipelined stages
Under such circumstances, the register balancing can be used to shift
the combinational logic from one of the pipelined stages to another
pipelined stage without affecting the functionality of the design. This is
achieved by compiler by using the following set of commands.
dc_shell> balance_registers
dc_shell> report_timing –path full –delay max –max_path 1 –nworst 1
9.5.7 Multicycle Paths
The multicycle paths in the design need to be reported. The paths can be set
so that the timing analyzer can perform the setup and hold check (Fig. 9.6).
Fig. 9.6Multicycle path
The commands used to set the multicycle path are listed in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1Commands used to report multicycle path
Command Description
create_clock –name clk_master -period 5
[get_ports clk_master]
To create the master clock of period 5 nsec

--- Page 219 ---
Command Description
set_multicycle_path 3 –setup –from [get_pins
UFFO/Q] –to [get_pins UFF1/D]
This set the multicycle path of 3 cycles
set_multicycle_path 2 –hold –from [get_pins
UFFO/Q] –to [get_pins UFF1/D]
This is used to move the hold check by 2 clock
cycles as set up is checked at third clock cycles
Consider the design scenario for the processor block. The processor
needs to perform the multiplication instruction and has pipelined
architecture. As multiplication requires more number of cycle the data
launched by the FF1 to FF2 is three cycle path, In such kind of scenarios
the setup need to be pushed by three cycles and need to move the hold
check by 2 cycles.

--- Page 220 ---
9.6 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
The following are important points to conclude the chapter.
1. Use the initial synthesis run and try to find the all violators during the
block-level synthesis.  
2. If block-level timing constraints are met, then only try to optimize for
the area if it is requirement.  
3. To optimize for area use the set_max_area attribute.  
4. To report the area use report_area and to report the timing use
report_timing  
5. To report all violators, use the command report_cosntraints –
all_violators  
6. Timing constraints are met indicates the positive setup and hold slack. 
7. To optimize the design for the timing use compile, characterize with
weight factor.  
8. Use the required area and speed optimization techniques to meet the
block and chip-level timing constraints.  
9. Report the multicycle and false paths for the design.  
This chapter has given us good understanding of the optimization
strategies and scenarios at the block level and chip level. In the next
chapter, we will discuss why the FPGA is best candidate for the
prototype? Even the next chapter will discuss the FPGA architecture and
Xilinx 7 series FPGAs.
References
1. www. springer. com: “ Advanced HDL Synthesis and SOC Prototyping: Vaibbhav Taraate”.

--- Page 221 ---
2. www. springer. com: “ Digital Logic Design Using Verilog: Vaibbhav Taraate”.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 222 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototypinghttps://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_10
10. FPGA for SOC Prototyping
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra, India
 
Vaibbhav TaraateEmail: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“High-density FPGAs from Xilinx and Intel are best candidates for the SOCprototyping.”
AbstractThis chapter discusses the FPGA architecture, FPGA design flow and how to utilizeFPGA resources for the SOC prototyping. The chapter discusses the FPGA synthesisand how the logic is inferred using the FPGA design tools. The VHDL design withfew scenarios and how to tweak the RTL for the FPGA design is also discussed in thechapter for better understanding of the FPGA synthesis.
KeywordsFPGA – SOC – Spartan-3A – Artix-7 – LUT – CLB – Slice – BRAM –Multiplier – Synthesis – RTL – VHDL – Implementation – Memory – DistributedRAM – Clocking – PLL – Decoding logic – Resource sharing – Logic duplication
10.1 Xilinx 7 Series FPGA
The objective of this section is to have the important highlights about the Xilinx 7series FPGA. Subsequently, we will try to use the Artix-7 board to understand theSOC prototype flow and how to get the efficient prototype using Xilinx Vivado tool.
Xilinx 7 series FPGA architecture highlights:
(1)It has the unified architecture and operates at 1 V for the technology library of28 nm.  
(2)The FPGA architecture has blocks CLBs, IOBs, transceivers, DSPs, PCIe,ADCs, and clock management tiles (CMT) .  

--- Page 223 ---
(3)The mid-range series of Xilinx 7 series architecture is Kintex and low end isArtix.  
(4)If we consider the high-end Virtex family architecture, then the architecture hasthe 3D multi-die stacked silicon interconnects (SSI), up to 1200 user pin IOs, upto 8 MB RAM, up to 2 M logic cells and 2.4 M flip-flops.
 
For more information, please visit www. xilinx. com for the architecture andpackage information of Artix-7 FPGAs. Figure 10.1 gives information about thedifferent functional block in Xilinx 7 series architecture.
Fig. 10.1Xilinx 7 series resources
Important features of the Xilinx 7 series FPGA are shown in Fig. 10.2 and the keyresources are CLB, BRAMs, DSP blocks, clocking resources, IO blocks, in-built IPs,routing and interconnect resources, transceiver, and system monitor features. Thissection discusses them with few design scenarios which can be useful during theprototyping.

--- Page 224 ---
Fig. 10.2Xilinx 7 series FPGA architecture blocks
10.1.1 Xilinx 7 Series CLB Architecture
The Xilinx 7 series CLB is shown in Fig. 10.3, and as shown, the following areimportant highlights

--- Page 225 ---
Fig. 10.3Xilinx 7 series CLB architecture [1]
1.It has two slices per CLB, and each CLB consists of six-input LUTs.  
2.Two slices are named as SLICEM and SLICEL; SLICEM consists of RAM/SR,and SLICEL consists of only logic.  
3.It has four flip-flops or latches and can be configured depending on the bit streamof the functionality.  
4.The CLB architecture has wide multiplexers and carry chain logic. So thearchitecture of CLB is efficient enough to design six inputs and multiple outputcombinational or sequential logic.
 
Example 1 below gives information about the use of CLBs? The synthesis toolwill infer the logic using multiple adders, subtractors, and required logic gates forsuch kind of design. The multiplexer logic is used to generate one of the outputsdepending on the unique code for the instruction which is called as opcode.
Example 1: VHDL description for the 8-bit ALU
Library ieee;

--- Page 226 ---
Use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
Entity  alu_logic is 
Port (  clk, reset_n: in std_logic;
op_code : in std_logic_vector ( 3 downto 0);
 a_in,b_in : in std_logic_vector ( 15 downto 0);
cin : in std_logic;
 alu_out : out std_logic_vector (15 downto 0);
 cout: out std_logic);
end alu_logic;
architecture arch_alu of alu_logic is
begin
         process (clk, reset_n, op_code, a_in, b_in, cin)
         variable result_out : unsigned (16 downto 0);
         begin
                 if (reset_n=‘0’) then
                 result_out :=(others =>‘0’);
                 else
                 case (op_code) is
                 when ”0000”=>  result_out := unsigned (‘0’ & a_in);
          when ”0001” => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ &  a_in) +unsigned (‘0’ & b_in);
                 when ”0010” => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ &  a_in) +unsigned (‘0’ & b_in)+cin;
              when ”0011” =>result_out :=  unsigned (‘0’ &  a_in) - unsigned (‘0’ & b_in);
                 when ”0100” => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ &  a_in) - unsigned (‘0’ & b_in)- cin;
                 when ”0101” =>result_out :=  unsigned (‘0’ &  a_in) +’1’;
                 when ”0110” => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ &  a_in) -’1’;
                 when ”1000” => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ & (a_in OR  b_in));
                 when ”1001” => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ & (a_in XOR  b_in));
                 when ”1010”  => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ & (a_in AND  b_in));
                 when ”1011”  => result_out := unsigned (‘0’ & NOT  (a_in ));

--- Page 227 ---
                 when others => result_out := (others=>‘0’);
                 end case; 
                 end if; 
         alu_out<= std_logic_vector( result_out(15 downto 0));
         cout <= std_logic(result_out(16));
         end process;
end  arch_alu;
The synthesis result is shown in Fig. 10.4. Still there is chance to optimize the designusing the resource sharing concept.
Fig. 10.4Synthesis result for the 8-bit ALU
10.1.2 Xilinx 7 Series Block RAM
The BRAMs are required in many applications, and the architecture of BRAM isvendor dependent. They can be configured using vendor-dependent EDA tool for therequired memory configuration. The following are important highlights for the Xilinx7 series BRAM1.The architecture has 36 KB BRAM and which can be visualized as 2 × 18 KBBRAM.  

--- Page 228 ---
2.The BRAM is synchronous RAM and can be cascaded without any logicoverheads to get 64 K × 1.  
3.The BRAM can be used as single port and dual port. In the dual-port mode, the18 KB BRAM can be used and configured as 18K × 1, 9K × 2, 8K × 4, 4K × 9,etc., and 36 KB BRAM can be used as 1K × 36, 2K × 9, 4K × 9, etc.
 
4.The BRAM architecture has built-in error correction (64-bit ECC), and they canbe used also in FIFO mode (Fig. 10.5).
Fig. 10.5Xilinx 7 series BRAM [1]
 

--- Page 229 ---
All kinds of the SOC design uses the memories of type RAM, ROM, contentaddressable. So let us think that, how these kinds of memories can be implemented.Either the memories can be instantiated from the cell library or from memorygenerator.To implement the small memories of few bits, the LUTs can be used. It isimportant that these memories can be efficient enough to load, store, and pass thedata. But to have the better and efficient architecture for the design instead ofdistributing the memories over the FPGA fabric, it is always better to use the BRAMs.The main features of BRAM are:
1.Synchronous memory: BRAMs can implement the synchronous single- or dual-port memory. One of the real beauties of such memory blocks is that, whenconfigured as dual-port RAM, each port can operate at different clockfrequencies.
 
2.They can be configured: The BRAM block is dedicated dual-port synchronousRAM block and can be configured as discussed above. Each port can beconfigured independently.
 
3.BRAMs and their use in the FIFO designs: The BRAMs can be used to storethe data as they are dedicated memory blocks and can be configured. Withadditional logic, FIFOs can be implemented using BRAMs. The depth of theFIFOs can be configured with the restriction that both the read and write sidesshould have same width.
 
4.Error correction: Consider the BRAM is configured as the 64-bit RAM, andthen, each BRAM can store additional Hamming code bits. These bits are used toperform the single-bit and double-bit error corrections during the read process.For 64-bit BRAM, each BRAM can store the eight-bit Hamming code. The errorcorrection logic can be also used while writing or reading from the externalmemories.
 
So let us think how the BRAMs are inferred?
The synthesis tool partitions the larger memories into small blocks, and each blockcan be implemented using BRAM. Effectively in the simple words, the BRAMs arevery effective building block which are inferred automatically during synthesis andthey are organised to implement the wide range of memories used for the SOC.Example 2 describes 16 × 2 BRAM and has 4 address lines and 2-bit data inputand 2-bit data output. It uses additional control signals as ‘clk’ and ‘write_en’.
Example 2: VHDL description for 16 × 2 BRAM

--- Page 230 ---
library  ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity BRAM_16x2 is
port (q_out: out std_logic_vector(1 downto 0);
write_en : in std_logic;
clk: in std_logic;
d_in: in std_logic_vector(1 downto 0);
a_in: in std_logic_vector(3 downto 0));
end BRAM_16x2;
architecture BRAM_arch of BRAM_16x2 is
component RAM16x1S is
port (O : out std_logic;
D : in std_logic;
A3, A2, A1, A0 : in std_logic;
WE, WCLK : in std_logic); 
end component;
Begin
U0 : RAM16x1S
port map (O => q_out(0), WE => write_en, WCLK => clk, D=> d_in(0), A0 => a_in(0), A1 => a_in(1), A2
=> a_in(2), A3 => a_in(3));
U1 : RAM16x1S
port map (O => q_out(1), WE => write_en, WCLK => clk, D=> d_in(1), A0 => a_in(0), A1 => a_in(1), A2
 => a_in(2),A3 => a_in(3));

--- Page 231 ---
end BRAM_arch;
The synthesis result for the BRAM 16 × 2 inferred by Vivado is shown in Fig. 10.6.
Fig. 10.6Synthesis result for the 16 × 2-bit BRAM
10.1.3 Xilinx 7 Series DSP
The Xilinx 7 series DSP48E1 slice architecture is shown in Fig. 10.7, and it supports96-bit multiply accumulate (MACC) operation. Few of the highlights of DSP blockare

--- Page 232 ---
Fig. 10.7Xilinx 7 series DSP slice [1]
(1)DSP slice has 25-bit pre-adder, 25 × 18-bit signed multiplier, and 48-bit ALU. 
(2)It is mainly used to implement the DSP algorithms; the shifters can beimplemented by using 17-bit shifter and pattern detector.  
(3)The slice also has cascade paths to implement a wide range of DSP functions andalgorithms.  
(4)It also provides the implementation of pipelined logic for the 12/24 bit of thedata.  
Example 3 describes the multiplier implementation using DSP block. Thesynthesis tool will try to push the logic into DSP block for such kind of designs.
Example 3: VHDL RTL for the 32-bit multiplier
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity without_resource_sharing is
port (a_in,b_in,c_in,d_in: in std_logic_vector (31 downto 0);
sel_in: in std_logic;
y_out: out std_logic_vector ( 63 downto 0));

--- Page 233 ---
end without_resource_sharing;
--Functional Description without pushing the common resources 
architecture arch_without_sharing ofwithout_resource_sharingis
begin
--Process sensitive to all the inputs and control signals
process (a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in, sel_in)
begin
          if (sel_in=‘1’) then
          y_out <= a_in *  b_in;
          else
          y_out <= c_in *  d_in;
          end if;
end process; 
end arch_without_sharing;
This kind of the design infers the multiplier chain at the input and depending on thestatus of the select input result of one of the multipliers is assigned to output (Fig.10.8). Using resource sharing, the single multiplier can be used and it is discussed inSect. 10.3.
Fig. 10.8Synthesis outcome of the 32 × 32-bit multiplier
Figure 10.9 gives information about the device utilization. The inferred logic usesthe four DSPs which is just 4.44% utilization of the available DSP blocks.

--- Page 234 ---
Fig. 10.9Artix-7 device utilization for multiplier
10.1.4 Xilinx 7 Series Clocking
For any design, the performance is dependent on the clock generation logic andarchitecture used for clocking the multiple CLBs. The clocking architecture for theXilinx 7 series devices is shown in Fig. 10.10, and the following are few of theimportant points

--- Page 235 ---
Fig. 10.10Xilinx 7 series clocking [1]
(1)The clock is divided into the clock regions, and effectively, it is half-width forevery 50 CLBs.  
(2)Every clock region can be treated as group of 20 DSPs, 10 BRAMs, 4transceivers, 50 IOBs, and PCIe.  
(3)It has CMTs, and the tiles are used adjacent to IO columns that is 1 tile perregion and 2 columns per device.  
(4)It has one centre clock spine and that is 1 horizontal clock row/region. 
10.1.5 XILINX 7 Series IO
As discussed in the earlier section, the overall performance of the SOC is dependenton the available IOs and their bandwidth the data transfer. The following areimportant points(1)The high-range IOBs supports standard up to 3.3 V, and the high-performanceIOB supports the standard up to 1.8 V.  
(2)The Xilinx 7 series has various types of IOs, and they are listed in Table 10.1:Xilinx 7 series IOs.  

--- Page 236 ---
Table 10.1Xilinx 7 series IOs
Sr.no. IO Description
1 Input–output block(IOB) The architecture has 2 columns per device and 50 IOBs per bank. Two distinctIOB types are high range and high performance
2 High-speed serialIO transceiverTransceivers are available in quad that is 4 per block. They have differenttypes and multiple standards: GTH/GTP/GTX/GTZ with the bandwidth of3.75–28 Gbps
3 PCI Express(PCIe) blocksThey are built in GTX serial IO transceivers, and they are compatible with theGen 1,2,3 protocols having 2.5, 5, and 8 Gbps bandwidth
4 XADCs For every analog-to-digital converter, there is analog sensor and thearchitecture has 12-bit two ADCs
10.1.6 Xilinx 7 Series Transceivers
The architecture has the low-power gigabit transceiver. Due to low-powerarchitecture, the chip-to-chip interface is optimized and this is one of the powerfulfeatures of this FPGA. The following are few highlights regarding the performance ofthese transceivers.
(1)The high-performance transceiver is capable to support the data rate from 6.6 to28.05 Gb/s depending on the family of the Virtex 7 FPGA.  
(2)The transceiver count is 16 in the Artix-7 FPGA family, up to 32 transceivers inthe Kintex 7 family and up to 96 transceivers in the Virtex 7 family.  
(3)To improve the IP portability, the architecture of the serial transceiver uses thering oscillators and LC tank circuit.  
(4)The transmitter and receiver circuits are different, and they uses the PLL tomultiply the reference clock by the programmable number up to 100 to get thebit-serial clock.
 
10.1.6.1 Transmitter
Following are the key features of gigabit transmitter:
1.The transmitter is parallel-to-serial converter with conversion ratio of 16, 20, 32,40, 64, or 80.  
2.The GTZ transmitter supports up to 160-bit data width. 

--- Page 237 ---
3.It uses TXOUTCLK and used to register the parallel data. 
4.The incoming parallel data is fed through an optional FIFO, and it provide thesufficient number of transitions, it has additional support of 8B/10B, 64B/66Bencoding schemes.
 
5.The output of these transmitters drives the PC board with the single-channeldifferential output signal.  
6.To compensate for the PC board losses, the output signal pair has programmablesignal swing.  
7.To reduce the power consumption, this swing can be reduced for the shorterchannels.  
10.1.6.2 Receiver
Following are key features of gigabit receivers:
1.The receiver is serial-to-parallel converter with conversion ratio of 16, 20, 32, 40,64, or 80.  
2.The GTZ receiver supports up to 160-bit data width.  
3.To guarantee sufficient data transition, it uses non-return-to-zero (NRZ) encoding. 
4.The parallel data is transferred into the FPGA using the RXUSRCLK. 
5.For short channels to reduce power consumption by almost 30%, the transceiveroffers special low-power (LPM) mode.  
10.1.7 In-Built IPs
Nowadays, FPGAs are more capable to be used in the communication, medicalimaging, and networking areas due to available PCIe, Ethernet MAC, Phy, andprocessor cores on the FPGA fabric.The Xilinx Virtex 7 series FPGA has the PCIe, Ethernet MAC, Phy integrated onthe FPGA fabric.
Ethernet: It can operate with the speed of 2.5 Gbits/s, and the Ethernet block isdesigned with the IEEE standard 802.3-2005
– The four tri-mode (10/100/1000 Mb/s) MAC blocks can be connected to theFPGA fabric, transceivers.

--- Page 238 ---
PCIe: The FPGA has the integrated interface block for the PCI Express and can beconfigured as the endpoint. It can operate at the speed of the 2.5 and 5 Gbit/s datarate.CPU hard core: The optimized ARM IP core which can run at the higher speed (10times more) as compared to RTL, and it can be used during prototyping if thee SOCprocessor core features are matching with the available IP core. If multipleprocessors are required during the prototyping, then use the multiple FPGAs withthe partitioned logic, but this may reduce the performance of the prototype due tothe bus access time. These blocks are not directly inferred by synthesis tool butneed to be instantiated using core generators.
10.1.8 Built-In Monitor
It can be used during prototyping to get the thermal and power supply information,and it does not need any instantiation in the design. Once the power connections aremade, then using the Test Access Port (TAP), the data can be accessed at any time.
10.2 Synthesis and Implementation Flow [2]
Synthesis during the prototype cycle can be performed before or after designpartitioning. The synthesis is the process of converting the RTL into equivalent gate-level netlist. If we consider the ASICs, then the synthesis is the process to get thenetlist using the standard cells for the targeted process node. In case of FPGA,outcome of the synthesis is the netlist using the FPGA resources. More about theFPGA architecture and prototype using single and miltiple FPGAs  is discussed inChap. 11.Depending on the target FPGA family or device, the synthesis tool generates theFPGA netlist and the FPGA backend tool uses the design constraints and netlist duringimplementation. Most of the time during the prototype, we need to understand aboutthe expected speed or performance for the design and that can be accomplished bysynthesis tools and it can be useful during the early phase of the design cycle totweak the architectures and constraints to achieve the required performance.For the FPGA design, the design flow from the RTL to device programming isdescribed in Fig. 10.11.

--- Page 239 ---
Fig. 10.11 FPGA design flow
RTL design for the SOC prototype is one of the major milestones, and in thismilestone, the RTL is tweaked to fit into the target FPGA. This may involve thechanges in the IPs, clock resources, and resizing the memory blocks, etc.The design partitioning is required if the design specifications are complex anddesign does not fit in the single FPGA. If multiple FPGAs are needed for theprototype and test the design, then the design can be partitioned manually or by usingthe partitioning tools. The design partitioning is discussed in detail in the next fewchapters.For the implementation tool, we need to provide the constraints and theseconstraints are to define the required speed and pin placements. These can be used bythe backend tools to optimize the design. Although the vendor-dependent directivesand algorithms at the synthesis level can optimize the design to achieve the desiredperformance, but it is essential to use the implementation constraints.A place and route tool use the FPGA netlist and the design constraints to place andmap the design for the target FPGA. The FPGA bit-stream file will be loaded into the

--- Page 240 ---
FPGA to achieve the desired functionality. Although it looks simple, this processinvolves multiple steps such as mapping, placement, routing, and timing analysis.The following can be few of the backend tools useful while prototyping the SOC
1.Floorplanning tool: Consider I need to place hundreds of IOs to achieve theperformance then what I should do? I will use the floorplanning tool which canachieve the IO placement, and for few critical designs it can be useful to place thelogic to meet the performance.
 
2.Core generators: This kind of tool is used to infer the IP cores for the specificRTL. The objective and use of the core generator are to understand the RTLstructures and replace them by the existing IP cores available for that FPGA. Inlayman’s language, it is like replacing the RTL with its FPGA equivalent logic.
 
3.FPGA editors: This can be used to modify the FPGA design after the placementand routing. This can be used as debugging tool at the implementation levelwhich allows the designer to modify the FPGA block placements, routing, etc.
 
4.In-circuit debugging tool: This allows the designer to capture and view theinternal design nodes.  
Now let us focus on the important practical aspect about how the logic is mappedinside the FPGA? (more details in Chap. 11, 12)
10.2.1 How Logic Is Mapped Using CLBs?
The logic is mapped using the CLBs as each CLB consists of multiple input LUTs andregisters. If we consider the Virtex7 architecture, then for the six-input logic functionlogic is mapped using 6-input LUTs. For more number of inputs, the LUTs can becascaded, and for the less number of input variables, the LUTs will be splited torealize the function.Consider the practical scenario where 4 or 5 inputs are used by the logic function,and then it can map the logic inside one CLB.Shift register or distributed RAM is inferred using the SLICEM.If we use the efficient FPGA synthesis tool, then it can detect the possibility of theset/reset assertions for asynchronous and synchronous set and reset to avoid themalfunctioning inside the FPGA.
10.2.2 How DSP Blocks Are Mapped?
The Virtex7 has the dedicated DSP block, and to improve the FPGA performance andto avoid the use of the other functional blocks, the synthesis tool can map the DSPfunctionality using the dedicated DSP blocks.Consider the multiply and accumulate (MAC) function, this can be mapped usingthe DSP block for the improved performance. If the DSP algorithm is more complex,

--- Page 241 ---
then multiple DSP blocks can be used to implement the wider range of arithmeticalgorithms. If we wish to have the pipelining in the DSP algorithm, then the pipelinedlogic can be mapped by using the DSP blocks.
10.2.3 How Memory Blocks Are Mapped Inside FPGA?
We need to have the internal storage in the form of the distributed RAM or blockRAMs. The performance of the overall design depends upon the mapping of theseblocks efficiently by synthesis tool. What we need to look into is that whether thesynthesis tool infer these blocks or not?The single- and dual-port RAMs should be inferred by the synthesis toolautomatically, and for the improved design performance, the adjacent pipelinedregisters should be picked up automatically at the input and output. For improvedspeed and area, it is essential that the synthesis tool can split the large memories intothe multiple BRAMs and even they should be able to have the address and dataaccording to the functional requirements.If we consider the synthesis tool features, then for the SOC design the synthesistools are smart and intelligent enough due to the use of the algorithms to partition andrealize the design. During prototyping, the designer should take care by using thevendor-dependent features of such tools to achieve the desired results. Most of thetime, we observe that such process is automated in the industry by using the synthesisscripts.But practically what care design team should take: Let me share my experiencewhen I was working on one of the SOC projects during the past decade!
1.The first important point I thought by visualizing the architecture that the designis too complex and needs partitioning.  
2.If my SOC functionality is larger than FPGA  logic density what I should do? Ineed to use the multiple FPGAs.  
3.Is it possible that I can achieve the desired speed of SOCs using FPGA?Practically not because the SOC speed is faster as compared to FPGA. 
4.Is it that my RTL can directly map on the FPGA? Answer is no I need to tweakthe RTL and make the changes and make it FPGA resource compliant; forexample, gated clock implementation in the ASIC and FPGA differs.
 
10.3 The Techniques for the Better Optimization
This section discusses the few optimization techniques during RTL design phase forefficient synthesis results.

--- Page 242 ---
10.3.1 Multipliers and Resource Sharing
Most of the time, we may have observed that the multipliers consume large areas. Dueto that, it always effects on the data arrival time if multipliers are used in the registerto register path. For FPGAs, there are dedicated block of DSP and can be used toimplement the larger area multipliers. Example 4 describes the use of 32 × 32-bitmultiplier using the resource sharing technique.
Example 4: VHDL design using resource sharing for multiplier
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
use ieee.std_logic_unsigned.all;
use ieee.std_logic_arith.all;
entity resource_sharing  is
port (a_in,b_in,c_in,d_in: in std_logic_vector (31 downto 0);
sel_in: in std_logic;
y_out: out std_logic_vector ( 63 downto 0));
end resource_sharing;
architecture arch_with_sharing of resource_sharing is
signal sig_1, sig_2 : std_logic_vector (31 downto 0);
begin
P1: process (a_in, b_in, c_in, d_in, sel_in)
begin
          if (sel_in=‘1’) then
          sig_1 <= a_in ;
          sig_2 <= b_in;
          else
          sig_1 <= c_in ;
          sig_2<= d_in;
          end if;
end process; 
P2: process ( sig_1, sig_2)
begin
          y_out <= sig_1 * sig_2;
end process;
end arch_with_sharing;
The synthesis result for the 32 × 32-bit multiplier using common resource asmultiplier is shown in Fig. 10.12. Instead of using the two multipliers to perform the

--- Page 243 ---
“a_in * b_in”, “c_in * d_in” the common resource (multiplier) is pushed on the rightside. The chain of multiplexers to select the desired input is used at the input side.This kind of technique is called as resource sharing, and most of the time, we need touse this during the RTL tweaks. This uses four DSP blocks if synthesis is performedfor xc7a35tcsg324-1.
Fig. 10.12Synthesis result for multiplier using resource sharing
10.3.2 Logic Duplication for the Larger Decoding Logic
The larger decoding logic needs to be partitioned during the RTL design phase. Forthat purpose, we can imagine multiple process blocks in parallel. So consider if wewish to have design of 8:256 decoder, then using the logic design techniques we needseventeen 4:16 decoders and hence larger area. This can be avoided by using RTLtweak to improve the area, and this technique is called as logic duplication. Usinglogic duplication, we just need two 4:16 decoders and 256 AND gates and hence hugesaving of area. This may be ruled out for the ASIC synthesis. as it may consume morearea!Example 5 describes the logic duplication functionality for 4:16 decoder. Thesynthesis is shown in Fig. 10.13, and it infers the two 2:4 decoder and 16 AND gates.

--- Page 244 ---
Fig. 10.13Synthesis result for the logic duplication technique
Example 5: VHDL description for the larger decoding logic using logicduplication
library ieee;
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all;
entity logic_duplication is 
port (data_in  : in std_logic_vector( 3 downto 0);
enable_in : in std_logic; 
data_out : out std_logic_vector ( 15 downto 0));
end logic_duplication;
architecture arch_logic_duplication of logic_duplication is
signal y_0_reg, y_1_reg : std_logic_vector ( 3 downto 0);
begin
process(data_in(1 downto 0), enable_in) 
begin
            if (enable_in =‘1’) then

--- Page 245 ---
                 case ( data_in(1 downto 0)) is
                           when ”00” => y_0_reg <= ”0001”;
                           when ”01” => y_0_reg <= ”0010”;
                           when ”10” => y_0_reg <= ”0100”;
                           when ”11” => y_0_reg <= ”1000”;
                    end case;
                 else 
                      y_0_reg <= ”0000”;
                 end if;
 end process; 
  process(data_in(3 downto 2), enable_in) 
   begin
                   if (enable_in =‘1’) then
                       case ( data_in(3 downto 2)) is
                       when ”00” => y_1_reg <= ”0001”;
                      when ”01” => y_1_reg <= ”0010”;
                       when ”10” => y_1_reg <= ”0100”;
                       when ”11” => y_1_reg <= ”1000”;
                       end case;
           else 
                           y_1_reg <= ”0000”;
                       end if;
  end process; 
            data_out(0) <= y_0_reg(0) and y_1_reg(0);
            data_out(1) <= y_0_reg(1) and y_1_reg(0);
            data_out(2) <= y_0_reg(2) and y_1_reg(0);
            data_out(3) <= y_0_reg(3) and y_1_reg(0);
            data_out(4) <= y_0_reg(0) and y_1_reg(1);
            data_out(5) <= y_0_reg(1) and y_1_reg(1);
            data_out(6) <= y_0_reg(2) and y_1_reg(1);
            data_out(7) <= y_0_reg(3) and y_1_reg(1);
            data_out(8) <= y_0_reg(0) and y_1_reg(2);
            data_out(9) <= y_0_reg(1) and y_1_reg(2);         
            data_out(10) <= y_0_reg(2) and y_1_reg(2);
            data_out(11) <= y_0_reg(3) and y_1_reg(2);

--- Page 246 ---
            data_out(12) <= y_0_reg(0) and y_1_reg(3);
            data_out(13) <= y_0_reg(1) and y_1_reg(3);
            data_out(14) <= y_0_reg(2) and y_1_reg(3);
            data_out(15) <= y_0_reg(3) and y_1_reg(3);   
            end arch_logic_duplication;
10.4 Strategies for SOC Prototyping
The strategies to achieve the desired goal of area, speed, and power during prototypephase can play an important role during prototyping phase. What should be thestrategy of SOC protoype team? And what should be thought process is addressed inthis section.
1. Using the initial synthesis and early estimation of logic density try to find thesuitable FPGA.  
2. The benchmark figure should be 60% utilization of the FPGA resources.  
3. If the logic cannot be mapped into single FPGA, then try to estimate the multipleFPGAs required for the prototype.  
4. Try to have plan for the RTL tweaks and synthesis tweaks to get the FPGAequivalent of the design.  
5. Try to have better understanding of the FPGA architecture and functional blocksso that the dedicated required blocks can be used to realize the prototype. 
6. Have better understanding of the IPs, analog and digital blocks and have strategyin place for the analog boards interfacing with the FPGAs. 
7. Have the strategies for the design partitioning at functional, synthesis, and netlistlevel for quick prototype.  
8. Use the block-level, top-level, and chip-level constraints and use the timinganalyzers to achieve them during the design synthesis and implementationphase.
 
9. Have the strategy for multiple clock domain designs, IO mappings, pinmultiplexing, high-speed data transfer.  
10.Have a testing plan in place and use the desired test methodologies to capture theresult.  

--- Page 247 ---
11.In the practical scenario, the design may not work at ASIC speed so use theclock scaling and lower down the prototype speed.  

--- Page 248 ---
10.5 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
The following are important points to conclude the chapter1.The FPGA is the best candidate for the ASIC or SOC prototype due toprogrammable features, low cost, and shorter implementation cycle. 
2.Prototype team should have strategies in place for single FPGA and multipleFPGA designs.  
3.It is recommended to use 60–70% FPGA resources during the prototype. 
4.Have strategies in place for synthesis tweaks and RTL tweaks to get FPGAequivalent.  
5.Use dedicated resources such as DSP blocks, BRAMs, multipliers, transceivers toimprove the quality and speed of the prototype.  
6.Identify the required partitioning tools, test equipment and have test plan in place. 
7.Have the strategy for the interface of the analog boards with the FPGA. 
8.Use the common resource sharing techniques for large density multipliers. 
9.Use the logic duplication techniques for the larger decoding logic.  
This chapter has given us understanding about the FPGA architecture, FPGAdesign flow, and how to prototype using the FPGA. The next chapter discusses theprototype using single and multiple FPGAs. The chapter is important to understandabout the prototype challenges during single and multiple FPGA prototypes andhow to overcome them?
References
1.www. xilinx. com.2.www. springer. com: “Advanced HDL Synthesis and SOC Prototyping: Vaibbhav Taraate”.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 249 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_11
11. Prototyping Using Single and Multiple
FPGAs
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“For the large density SOCs, the design may not fit on single
FPGA fabric and hence it should be prototyped using the multiple
FPGAs.”
Abstract
The chapter discusses the prototyping using the single and multiple FPGAs.
The need for partitioning the design, important challenges during the design
implementation, and the guidelines for the design prototyping is discussed
in this chapter. During prototyping, we need to have the FPGA equivalent
for the ASIC RTL, the clock gating conversions and RTL tweaks are also
discussed in this chapter.
KeywordsFPGA partitioning – Multiplexing – LVDS – SerDes – IO
constraints – Synthesis – IO pad
During this decade the complexity of design has grown and the designs
need to be realized for the required functionality to achieve high speed,
low power and minimum area. Meeting the design and optimization
constraints with the FPGA equivalent functionality realization is the main

--- Page 250 ---
objective of the FPGA prototype. In such scenario, depending on the design
complexity the design needs to be prototyped using the single or multiple
FPGAs. The following few sections describe the scenarios and important
highlights about the prototype using single and multiple FPGAs.
11.1 Choosing the Target FPGA
For the prototype as discussed, the best candidate can be FPGA. FPGA is
field programmable and has adequate resources to realize the large density
designs. One of the main important questions which need to be answered is
how I can choose the target FPGA for the design.
The answer to the question is not as simple as we think! The reason
being it requires good amount of experience to perceive the architecture
functionality using the FPGA equivalent blocks. So during the architecture
design of the SOCs most of the time, team might have discussion about the
same. So with reference to this what we need to consider to select the target
FPGA for the prototype is discussed in this section.
1. Architecture understanding: From the architecture, we can get
information about the required resources to implement the logic,
memory requirements, IP requirements, and initial estimate about the
gate count and interfaces required. By considering all these points, we
can choose the target FPGA.
 
2. Understanding of FPGA architecture and resources:
(1)We need to consider about the number of CLBs the FPGA has as
it gives information about the logic density. The combinational
and sequential logic is implemented using the CLB. Consider the
Artix-7 FPGA has 215 K logic cells, and our goal is to use 40–
70% of the resources to implement the custom logic.
 
(2)As discussed in the previous chapter, we need to know about the
memory requirement for the design. So, we need to consider
about the BRAMs available in the FPGA. During the
implementation, the RAM, ROM, and FIFO can be configured
using BRAMs. If we consider Artix-7 family, then it has 143 Mb
 
 

--- Page 251 ---
BRAM. Even we need to consider about the performance of the
BRAM.
(3)For larger density and complex complexity operations, we need to
estimate about the requirement of logic. Consider the large
density multipliers, floating point arithmetic, or real-time data
processing for the audio and video. In such kind of applications,
the ASIC functionality needs to be pushed by using the DSP
blocks. So, how many DSP slices are available in the FPGA and
what is the performance are other important parameters which
need to be considered. If we consider the Artix-7 FPGA, then it
has 740 DSP slices.
 
(4)Now let us understand about the IO availability. As SOCs need
hundreds of IO pins, we need to consider about the IO availability
while choosing the FPGA. What is the IO voltage level and what
is the speed of IO that need to be considered while choosing the
FPGA. Artix-7 FPGA has 500 IO pins, and the IO voltage level is
1.2–3.3 V.
 
(5)The transceivers and other interfaces also need to be understood.
The Artix-7 FPGA has 16 transceivers and having the speed of
6.6 Gb/s.
 
(6)Apart from all above, we need to think about the other interfaces
such as PCIe and maximum permissible clock speed for the
FPGA. Obviously, it is dependent on the FPGA architecture and
speed of the IO interfaces.
 
11.2 SOC Prototyping Using Single FPGA
Imagine a design scenario to prototype the design shown in Fig. 11.1.

--- Page 252 ---
Fig. 11.1 SOC on single FPGA
From the architecture understanding and from the initial synthesis, the
team can get information about the gate count requirements. For example, if
the logic density requirement is 200,000 gates and the FPGA family has the
same number of gate counts, then it is always wise decision to choose the
FPGA of high gate count family. The following are few of the important
points to choose the FPGA, while prototype for the moderate gate count
designs. The thumb rule during prototype is, design should use of 60–70%
of the FPGA resources during prototype.
The following are few of the important points to choose the FPGA,
during prototype for the moderate gate count designs.
1. Have better understanding of the Architecture: Try to have the
better understanding of the architecture and initial synthesis results to
find the estimation of the FPGA resources required. Consider the small
logic density block of the processor. If only 16–20 instructions to
 

--- Page 253 ---
perform the arithmetic, logical, data transfer, and branching operations
are required, then it can be accommodated in small portion of FPGAs.
If initial gate count estimation is 10,000 gates, then try to find the CLB
count while choosing the FPGA.
2. Internal Memory requirements: Try to find the internal storage
required for the design. If internal memory requirement is 64 Kbyte,
then try to find the available BRAMs from FPGA architecture
datasheets.
 
3. Required DSP functionality: If the DSP functionality such as filters,
multiply, and accumulate is required, then the large density multiplier
chain needs to be pushed using the DSP blocks. In such scenario, try to
identify the complexity of the DSP functionality and then choose the
suitable FPGA which can support the implementation using the DSP
blocks.
 
4. Required FPGA interfaces: During prototype to achieve the target
speed, it is essential to use the high-speed interfaces. So, the prototype
team should identify the different IOs according to voltage levels and
data transfer speed.
 
5. Requirement of high-speed IOs: Depending on the requirement of
speed, try to target the prototype using the high-speed IOs to data
transfer between the FPGA and other boards.
 
6. Partitioning and pin multiplexing: For better prototype, partition the
design across sequential boundaries and use the TDM and LVDS for
the data transfer across the FPGA boundaries.
 
7. Support for the IPs: Try to understand whether the FPGA architecture
can support the configurable or hard IP cores. Depending on the
requirement, choose the FPGA family.
 
8. Configuration management and test: Try to identify whether the
FPGA family has the dedicated blocks for the configuration
management and for the testing.
 

--- Page 254 ---
11.3 How to Reduce the Risk During the
Prototyping?
Reducing risk during the prototype is the important objective, and for that
purpose we need to have better strategies during the selection of FPGA
prototyping platform. We can think about the architecture level strategies to
estimate the logic density and to identify the interfaces and IPs required.
But it is very difficult or impossible during initial phase to accurately
estimate the logic density required for the design, and even it is difficult to
predict the total number of logic cells for the design. In this context, the
better approach is to perform the synthesis at the end of the RTL design
phase and go through the resource utilization summary. The thumb rule is,
the resource utilization for the SOC design should be in the range of 60–
70% of FPGA resources for the single FPGA design. If the utilization is
more than 70% then it is a better choice to partition the design into multiple
FPGAs. That call should be taken by the prototype team.
For the routing, debug logic and for the additional functionality
requirements or specification improvements additional logic may be
required. So while prototyping or choosing the FPGA, do not consume the
100% FPGA resources.
If the resource utilization results in the utilization of more than 100%,
then definitely the SOC design cannot be mapped on the single FPGA and
may need the multiple FPGAs. Although there are architecture and RTL
tweaks to reduce the area, they may not yield into the efficient prototype
due to high logic cell requirement, routing, and high efforts during
synthesis. Instead of that, find the available LUTs in the FPGA and take the
ratio of the (LUTs required for the SOC design/LUTs available in the
FPGA).
This ratio is useful to conclude the number of FPGAs. But instead of
thinking about the use of 100% FPGA resources, it is better to think about
the max of 60% FPGA resources. If I am the team lead, then I will consider
the FPGA resource utilization around 40–50%.
So, the number of FPGAs = (LUTs required for the SOC design)/(LUTs
available in the FPGA * 40%). This can give the better freedom to the
architecture team to cope up with the architecture/design changes and to
add the test and debug logic for the SOC design.

--- Page 255 ---
For example; consider the Virtex7 7VX200T FPGA has LUTs = 
1,221,600 and design needs 2,100,000 LUTs then the number of FPGA
required = (2,100,000)/(1,221,600 * 0.4) = 4.29 so we can think about the
design using the five FPGAs and for the efficient prototype the design
should be well partitioned!
11.4 Prototyping Using Multiple FPGAs
Consider the SOC design which has the processor for the general-purpose
computing, DDR3 memory controller, and video encoder and decoder IP. If
the design need is of 200,000 logic gates, then the design cannot fit on the
single FPGA of Artix-7. In such circumstances, we need to use the design
partitioning to target the design using multiple FPGAs. For most of the
SOCs, we need to target the prototype using the multiple FPGA
architectures. The FPGAs can be connected using ring- or star-type
topology. Figure 11.2 shows logic on the multiple FPGAs using the cable
connectivity.
Fig. 11.2 Multiple FPGAs during SOC prototype
The following are few of the important recommendations useful during
the prototype using multiple FPGAs.
1. Have better understating of the Design: Try to understand the analog
and digital functionality for the design, and partition the design into the
analog and digital design domains. Use the partitioning tools to have
 

--- Page 256 ---
the better results. The automatic partitioning tools can be used to have
the better partitioning of the design across sequential boundaries.
2. Analog functionality and the additional interfaces: As FPGA is good
candidate to realize the digital design, but practically the design has
both analog and digital blocks. So, try to choose the additional daughter
boards interface FPGA  with the ADC and DAC.
 
3. Efficient use of the resources: Try to have strategy while performing
the partitioning to allow the EDA tool to have maximum 70% of the
FPGA resources. This will allow the prototype team to add the BIST
and debug logic during the board bring-up phase.
 
4. Requirement of IOs and pin multiplexing: The speed of IO is an
important factor which decides the overall performance of the
prototype. There are additional multiplexing strategies that need to be
deployed for the multiple FPGA designs.
 
5. Clocking strategies: Depending on the requirement of the star and ring
topology, it is essential to think about the clocking strategies for the
multiple FPGA designs. The clock skew and other board delays need to
be thought during the debug and the test phase.
 
6. IO interfaces: At the SOC architecture level, the decision should be
made about the prototype feature requirement. Always it is a better
choice to consider about the IO speed, IO voltage, bandwidth, clock
and reset network, external interfaces while designing the prototype
using the single or multiple FPGAs!
 
7. IP requirements: IPs are available in the following format, and the
prototype team needs to use the IPs during the design cycle at the
different stages.
1. RTL Source code of IP: Open source code or the license version of
the IP source code is available. The source code using VHDL or
Verilog is available.
 
2. Soft IP: This type of IP cores is sometimes encrypted versions, and
they need to have some processing during the design and reuse. 
 

--- Page 257 ---
3. IPs in the netlist form: They are available in the form of the pre-
synthesized netlist of the SOC components or Synopsys GTECH.  
4. Physical IP: They are also called as hard IPs, and they are pre-laid
out by the foundry.  
5. Encrypted Source Code: The RTL is protected with the encrypted
key and must be decrypted to get the RTL source.  
8. FPGA connectivity: The prototype team need to think about the ring,
star, or mix-type connectivity for the prototype using the multiple
FPGAs. The following are few of the highlights:
a. Ring-type connectivity between FPGAs:
In such type of arrangement, the multiple FPGAs are connected
to form the ring.
In such type of connectivity, it increases the overall path delay.
As the signal is passing through the FPGA, the equivalent
prototype logic can resemble priority logic. This type of the
connectivity has slower speed as compared to other types of
boards.
If we try to visualize the ring-type connections, then at high
level we can think about the pin connection using such type of
inter-FPGA connectivity. The wastage of IOs cannot be limited in
such kind of the connectivity. The FPGAs are at the downside; IOs
will be wasted, and it is additional overhead to the board designer
and board layout team to connect these IOs to high impedance
states.
 
b. Star Connectivity:
This type of inter-FPGA connectivity is faster as compared to
the ring arrangement due to the direct connections with the other
FPGAs. For the better prototype performance, use the high-speed
interconnects between the FPGAs and configure the unused pins as
high impendence state.
 
 

--- Page 258 ---
c. Mixed Connectivity:
During the board design and layout, we may use the mix of the
ring-type connections and star connectivity. Such type of
connectivity can have the moderate performance. The boards
available in the market from vendors have fixed connectivity and
may not be suitable during prototyping as they do not match the
specifications and requirements. Under such circumstances
depending on the design complexity, it is better to choose interface
connectivity for better prototype performance.
 
11.5 Deferred Interconnects
It is very much advisable to use the deferred interconnect using the cables
in the multiple FPGA platforms. As connections are not fixed, it gives
flexibility to the prototype team to use the cables with the required
connections. Figure 11.3 shows a multiple FPGA connectivity using the
cables.
Fig. 11.3 Deferred connection between the FPGAs
As shown in Fig. 11.3, the switched routing matrix can be used to
establish the connectivity between the different FPGA boards. The board
layout and design team need to have better startegy to provide this type of
connectivity for the multi-FPGA designs. The number of layers for the

--- Page 259 ---
complex SOC boards can be of minimum 40–50, and these connections can
give the freedom to the prototype team due to programmable features.
This type of connectivity uses the programmable switches with the
switch matrix for establishing the connections between the FPGAs. So
instead of having the static connections, the board connections can be
programmed and configured. Such type of connectivity can be treated as
dynamic connectivity with reuse.
One of the major advantages of this type of connectivity is to add the
debug and test circuitry as and when required on the field or off the field
due to plug-and-play programmable arrangement.
The care should be taken to fix the pin placements during design
partitioning to program the switches, and for that purpose the portioning
EDA tools can be used.
The speed is the important aspect for any kind of prototype, and as
discussed the speed of prototype is dependent on the interconnect
impedances and stray capacitances. The interconnect delays are function of
the wire length and may be prone to cross talks due to the differed
impedances. During the timing estimations, it is required to consider the
delays between the FPGAs (onboard delays) and logic delays (on-chip
delays). In the simple terminology, we can treat the delays as off-FPGA and
on-FPGA delays. To improve the performance of the prototype, it is
recommended to use the high-speed differential signals between the FPGAs
(Fig. 11.4).

--- Page 260 ---
Fig. 11.4 A multiple FPGA connectivity using switch matrix
11.6 Onboard Delay Timing [1]
Let us consider the direct interconnect between two FPGAs. We need to
consider about delays to find out the overall data transfer between the two
FPGAs.

--- Page 261 ---
tpffl
toutbuf
tinbuf
tsu
ton_board
As discussed, we can have the direct connection between the FPGAs
and the following are the main important delay parameters which can be
used to find the speed of the design.
Clock to q delay of the launch flip-flop
The output buffer delay at launch FPGA pad
The input buffer delay at capture FPGA pad
Setup time of the flip-flop
Onboard delay of the interconnects between the FPGAs.
So for the desired timing performance, it is essential to meet the setup
time at the capture edge. So, the max delay time to reach data at the data
input of the FPGA#2 (Fig. 11.5).
Fig. 11.5 Multiple FPGA design timings
Thus, the maximum frequency can be computed by using
If cable connections are used between the multiple FPGAs, then while
calculating the maximum operating frequency consider the maximum
onboard delay as function of the cable length. The max cable delay between
the FPGAs can be treated as onboard delay (Fig. 11.6).

--- Page 262 ---
Fig. 11.6 Multiple FPGA communications using cable connectors
If the programmable switches are used to establish the connectivity
between the FPGAs, then use the delay of the switch matrix (Fig. 11.7).
Fig. 11.7 Multiple FPGA communications using switch matrix
The maximum operating frequency can be computed using the
following formula
In such type of connectivity, the onboard delay is denoted by
tswitch_matrix.

--- Page 263 ---
To conclude, the prototype engineer needs to take care of the following
important points during SOC prototyping!
1. RTL coding style and the design mapping on the single or multiple
FPGAs  
2. Complexity of buses and interconnects  
3. IP block use and their timing  
4. Overall % utilization for each FPGA device  
5. IO speed and bandwidth to have the data transfer between the FPGAs. 
11.7 Strategies and Guidelines for the Efficient
Prototyping
Better strategies during the project planning and during the RTL design and
synthesis can result in the efficient prototype. This section discusses the
important strategies and guidelines during the design, implementation, and
prototyping phase.
11.7.1 General Guidelines and Project Planning [1]
What I should think about the efficient prototyping platform to validate the
SOC? This is the first fundamental question which needs to be answered!
The answer is the platform should have the efficient architecture and the
better test and debug plan to achieve the desired performance for the SOC!
The following section gives information about the same:
1. Allocate the primary and secondary responsibilities: It is very much
required to allocate the primary and secondary responsibilities to the
team members working for the prototype. It is always advisable to have
the communication between the RTL design team and the SOC
prototype team. This will yield into the better result, and both teams
will be able to understand about the risk during the design and
prototype.
 

--- Page 264 ---
2. Comparative milestones: It is advisable to compare the result of the
SOC prototype with the golden reference. This comparative method is
useful to understand the stage of the prototype. For example, the
functional converge during verification is 97% and at the prototype
level it is almost 80%. If this information is captured, then the
improvements can be made in the existing design/test and debug
environment to achieve the higher coverage at the board level also.
 
3. Version Control: Use the version control for the software and the RTL
modification as this database is useful during the SOC prototype cycle. 
4. List of deliverables and milestones: Create the database of the
deliverables or milestones for the prototype. The following can be
deliverables for the SOC design:
System requirement specifications
Risk and dependability document
C/C++ functional golden reference design
Architecture of the SOC
Micro-architecture for the SOC
Clocking network and distribution
Pin count of the SOC and their functionality
RTL design versions
RTL verification plan and versions
SOC synthesis and timing scripts with the design constraints
Timing, area, and power reports for the individual functional blocks
Top-level area, timing and power constraints, and the reports
Implementation constraints and target FPGA architectures
Multiple FPGA partitioning and board layouts
Test and debug plans
Technology-Independent Design: Has a practice to use the
technology-independent design. To preserve the RTL, use the
compiler directives.
 
11.7.2 IO Planning and Strategies to Minimize Pin Count [1]
11.7.2.1 IO Multiplexing

--- Page 265 ---
To minimize the pin count, the IO pins can be multiplexed. The section
discusses the different IO multiplexing techniques used in the SOC
prototype.
As discussed earlier, the IO multiplexing can be achieved by using the
1. MUX-based IO multiplexing 
2. SerDes-based IO multiplexing 
3. IO multiplexing using the shifter. 
11.7.2.2 MUX-Based IO Multiplexing
In this type of technique, the multiplexer and demultiplexers are used.
Consider the n:1 MUX receiving the IO signals inside FPGA #1. The FPGA
#1 operates on ‘transfer clock.’ The n IOs are multiplexed and to transfer
data they use the ‘transfer clock.’ The FPGA #2 uses ‘receive clock’ to
receive or sample the IO signals, and they are demultiplexed using 1: n
demultiplexer (Fig. 11.8).
Fig. 11.8 MUX-based IO multiplexing
If n = 4, then 4 IOs multiplexed need to transfer the IO signal at the
clock rate of the n * 4. So, the FPGA#1 system clock is ‘clk’ then the

--- Page 266 ---
transfer clock should be n*clk. The transfer and receive clock for the MUX-
based IO multiplexing should be the same that is they should have the same
clock frequency.
11.7.2.3 IO Multiplexing Using SerDes
This is one of the techniques to multiplex IOs, and in this technique the
SerDes and LVDS are used to transfer the IO signal from the launch FPGA
to capture FPGA.
The launch FPGA can transfer the differential signal using the transfer
clock, and this signal is received by capture FPGA (Fig. 11.9).
Fig. 11.9 LVDS and IO SerDes for serial transfer
11.8 IO Planning and Constraints [1]
For the efficient prototype, the IO planning, documentation, and
constraining them are the important tasks. IO planning using Xilinx Vivado
is described below.
Use the IO planning layout shown in Fig. 11.10 [2].

--- Page 267 ---
Fig. 11.10IO planning layout [2]
To perform the IO planning, use the following auxiliary view after
clicking on IO planning (Fig. 11.11).

--- Page 268 ---
Fig. 11.11 IO planning auxiliary view [2]
In the auxiliary view the package is displayed and after the
device selection; constraints the IO ports are displayed in the console area.
With multiple IO standards, the design inputs and outputs are listed in the
IO tab area.
In the IO tab area, click on the (+) box for inputs (d_in) and output
(y_out) (Fig. 11.12).

--- Page 269 ---
Fig. 11.12IO standards [2]
Now, you can see the IO standards. For the d_in (6 downto 0) and y_out
(6 downto 0), the IO standard LVCMOS33 is used, and for the d_in (7) and
y_out (7) the default IO standard LVCMOS18 is used. Depending on the IO
requirements, one of the IO standards can be chosen. Now to change the IO
standard for the y_out (7) to LVCMOS33, use the following (Fig. 11.13).
Fig. 11.13Selection for IO standard [2]
By using the tcl commands, also IO standards can be assigned. Use the
following commands:
set_property package_pin V5 [get_ports {y_out [7]}]

--- Page 270 ---
set_property iostandard LVCMOS33 [get_ports [list {y_out [7]}]]
Even by using the IO port properties, the IO standards can be assigned.
After assignment of IO standards, save the constraints in the
comb_design.xdc file.
But for the larger SOC design, the manual IO planning is not the correct
option. The manual error can occur while selecting the IO standards and
voltage domains and while assigning the constraints. So, use the script to
lock the IO locations for the respective IO standards and to constrain the IO
delays.

--- Page 271 ---
11.9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
The following are few important points to conclude the chapter:
1. Use single or multiple FPGAs to have prototype of SOC. 
2. Use the prototype guidelines while prototyping the design. 
3. Partition the design to achieve the better synthesis results. 
4. Use the architecture and RTL tweaks while prototyping using the
FPGA.  
5. Use either star, ring, or mixed connectivity for the multiple FPGA
designs.  
6. Use the partitioning tools while performing the design partitioning. 
7. Partition the design by considering the sequential boundaries. 
8. Use the multiplexing schemes for IOs to minimize the pin count. 
This chapter has given us understanding about the prototyping using the
single and multiple FPGAs. We have discussed about the strategies,
guidelines, risks, IO planning, and multiplexing schemes. The next
chapter is focused on the partitioning and FPGA synthesis. Even in the
next chapter, we will discuss required tweaks to get the FPGA equivalent
for the ASIC design.
References
1. www. springer. com: “Advanced HDL Synthesis and SOC Prototyping: Vaibbhav Taraate”.
2. www. xilinx. com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 272 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_12
12. SOC Design Synthesis and
Implementation
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
"Better design partitioning and synthesis to achieve the desired
timing can result in efficient design implementation."
Abstract
Most of us know that the ASIC synthesis differs as compare to FPGA
synthesis in many ways. When the RTL design phase is over and the initial
ASIC synthesis results are available, then the FPGA prototyping phase
kicks off. Logic density count during initial synthesis can be used to
prototype the single or multiple FPGA designs. In such scenarios, the
chapter discusses the synthesis and design implementation for the SOC
prototyping. The chapter also discusses the scenarios to get the FPGA
equivalent for the ASIC functionality.
KeywordsASIC – FPGA – Synthesis – Partitioning – Manual partitioning
– Automatic partitioning – Partitioning tools – Incremental synthesis –
Compile strategies – Gated clock conversions – Memory modeling –
Wrapper – Analog equivalent

--- Page 273 ---
As stated in the previous few chapters, the objective of the prototyping team
is to achieve the functional and timing results in quick time using single or
multiple FPGA designs. Now let us understand how this goal can be
fulfilled and how we can get the efficient prototype. To achieve the desired
goal, the design should be partitioned and synthesis needs to be carried out
to get the FPGA equivalent design.
Consider the design functionality shown in Fig. 12.1 and needs to be
realized on the single large density FPGA.
Fig. 12.1Top-level design of SOC
Consider the top-level design shown in Fig. 12.1, and initial synthesis is
carried out. The design meets the constraints, and we are targeting the
design to have the efficient prototype. In this context, the following section

--- Page 274 ---
discusses the design partitioning and the synthesis to get the FPGA
equivalent.
12.1 Design Partitioning and Goals
The design partitioning can be accomplished at the
Architecture level
Synthesis level
Netlist level.
To achieve the better design partitioning, we need to have the following
strategies.
1. Analyze the architecture and micro-architecture: During the RTL
design phase, the architecture and micro-architecture were used as
reference document. The document has information about the
functional blocks, memory requirements, interfaces, and timing. For
example, the partitioning clusters can be
i. Processor, DSP logic, and internal memory 
ii. Serial IO parallel IO  
iii.Memory controller and high-speed interfaces 
iv. Control and timing unit  
v. BIST.  
This kind of partitioning at the architecture level is helpful to have
the better performance due to smaller interconnect delays.
 
2. Define the hardware and software boundaries: Which blocks need to
be implemented in the hardware and which need to be implemented in
the software should be defined. For example, the initial setup and
configuration can be controlled by the software; large data storage can
be implemented using software. DSP, audio, video, and processing
blocks can be implemented using hardware [1].
 

--- Page 275 ---
3. Use partitioning tools: Try to use the automatic partitioning tools, and
try to partition the design at synthesis and netlist level. 
4. FPGA Equivalent: Try to estimate the resources at synthesis level
while partitioning the design, and try to perceive the modifications
required to get the FPGA equivalent design.
 
5. Modular design approach: While partitioning, use the sequential
boundaries and use the modular design approach. Large density blocks
should be decomposed into smaller designs to yield better partitioning
result.
 
6. Have understanding of the multiple clock domains: Use the separate
partition for each clock domain. This will be useful to get the FPGA
equivalent for the particular clock group, and design implementation
will be easy.
 
7. IO Schemes: Partition the design by considering different IO schemes’
requirement and external connectivity information.  
12.2 Challenges in the Design Partitioning
Logical partitioning at the architecture level may result in inefficient
synthesis. If the resource estimation is not perceived at the architecture
level, then meeting the design constraints will be difficult. Under such
scenario, it is better to use the partitioning tools while partitioning the
design.
The major challenge to the prototype team is meeting the design
constraints like power, speed, and area. This can be achieved by the
synthesis optimization for the area and speed.
Most of the time, we may have observed about tweaking the design
architecture to meet the design constraints as it helps during the RTL design
phase. In such context, a lot of time and energy of the RTL design team is
wasted to perceive the design changes if partitioning tools are not used.
Logical design partitioning for better synthesis and optimization!

--- Page 276 ---
The following can be few of the thoughts to partition the design for better
synthesis and design optimization.
Modular approach while partitioning: Retain the hierarchy of the
design and use the modular approach while partitioning the design. This
will allow the RTL design and verification team to have the better and clean
timing paths during the logic synthesis.
Keep in mind the design reuse: If the design is partitioned by retaining
hierarchy of the design, then the design can be reused to achieve the
synthesis goals.
This will even improve the design timing. If we consider Fig. 12.1, then
the partitioning of the design into multiple clusters where the processing,
control, test, and IO blocks can be grouped into the different clusters can
result into better implementation. During design cycle if we wish to reuse
the processing block then due to better partitioning it is possible. It is better
to have design reuse for the large density processing elements.
The following are few of the techniques for the logical partitioning of
the design.
1. Partition the design by considering the sequential boundaries. Do not
partition the design across combinational boundaries.  
2. Partition the design for the design reuse as it helps the prototype team
to get the efficient prototype.  
3. Partition the design which can have separate BIST and configuration
logic.  
4. Partition the design depending on the clock groups, and isolate the state
machine controller and other control logic.  
5. Use the separate blocks such as synchronizer, test, and debug logic, and
deploy then at the top level.  
6. Have better understanding of the initial floorplanning and architecture
before partitioning of the design.  
For the efficient synthesis, the designer can use the following
guidelines.

--- Page 277 ---
1. Design should be technology independent [1] 
The designer should keep in mind that the RTL should be written in such a
way that it should be technology independent. It is possible only when the
hard core instances of library gates are minimized. Try to understand the
difference between the instantiation and the inference! The preference
during the RTL design should be given to inference instead of the
instantiation.
The major advantage of the inference of the logic is that, the design can
be implemented for any ASIC library and new technology node through the
re-synthesis. If synthesizable IP cores are used in the design, then
technology-independent HDL can improve the synthesis result. Manage the
instantiated logic depending on the use of library into separate modules so
that it will be lesser time consuming while migrating to other technology
libraries.
2. How I can partition the clock-related logic in the design? [1] 
Use the separate design for the clock gating logic and reset logic and should
be set as don’t touch. This will help in the clean timing if we use the
different clock groups.
In single module, avoid use of the multiple clocks as this will help while
writing the block-level constraints with reference to the clock.
In the multiple clock domain designs, it is not possible to keep the
multiple clock logics in different blocks. In such scenario, perform the
stand-alone synthesis of the synchronizers and use the don’t_touch attribute
while instantiating the synchronizers in the main block.
In the hierarchical designs, use the same name for the clock throughout
the hierarchy as it helps during script writing and during the synthesis.
3. Partitioning Challenges in the single and multiple FPGA designs?
[1]  
Whether it is single FPGA design or multiple FPGA designs, the design
partitioning has many challenges and few of them are listed in this section.

--- Page 278 ---
1. Design synchronization  
2. Identifying the large density blocks  
3. Identifying the highly interdependent functional blocks 
4. Grouping the interdependent blocks  
5. Identifying the hardware and software functional blocks and their
synchronization  
6. Interconnectivity between the multiple FPGAs  
7. Partitioning of the design with the goal to minimize the interconnect
issues  
8. Signal integrity issues for the multiple FPGAs  
9. IO voltage domains and connectivity  
10.FPGA availability, resources and limitation on pin count  
11. Clock network delay and uniform distribution of the clock. 
4 What exactly we are trying to achieve with better partitioning? [1]
1. Better design mapping on multiple FPGAs  
2. Better IO constraints at FPGA level and at board level. Use of these
constraints directly by the placement and routing tool 
3. Logic replication or duplication for the multiple FPGA designs and
efficient use of IO multiplexing  
4. Better use of the combination of synthesis, partitioning, and
placement and routing tools to get the desired performance 
 

--- Page 279 ---
5. Useful to identify the correct topology in which the multiple
FPGAs should be connected.  
12.3 How to Overcome the Partitioning
Challenges [1]
The different techniques at the architecture level and at the netlist level can
be used to partition the design for the better prototype. The better
partitioning can be achieved by using the partitioning tool. This section
discusses few of partitioning techniques.
12.3.1 Architecture Level
Have the better understanding of the architecture of the SOC, functional
specifications and the key resources. The closer look at the architecture and
micro-architecture can give the fair understanding of the partitioning of the
design at the hardware and software levels.
For example, if we are designing the SOC which consists of the general-
purpose processor and DSP processor with audio, video, and other
associated logic, then the following way I will think.
1. What are the features of the processor and what is rough estimation of
the resources required?  
2. What are the functional specifications of the DSP processor and the
audio and video decoders used in the design? How many resources
required during the implementation?
 
3. Other associated logics such as memory controller, serial–parallel bus
logic, internal memory capacity and specifications.  
So while partitioning the design, the group I can be processor, memory
controller, buses, and internal storage and another group can be DSP
processor, and audio and video decoders. This can be a better way while
prototyping the SOC using the multiple FPGAs. Again the group I and
group II functionality need to be partitioned into the smaller blocks to have
modular design.

--- Page 280 ---
If we try to speak in the context of prototyping the SOC, then the design
can be partitioned by identifying:
1. Design blocks which should be validated using the FPGAs (for the
FPGA validation)  
2. Design blocks interfaced with the FPGA (outside FPGA).  
The design partitioning to get the FPGA compatible RTL is shown in
Fig. 12.2.


--- Page 281 ---
Fig. 12.2Design partitioning to get the FPGA compatible RTL
The FPGA compatible RTL can be partitioned using the top-down
approach to get the RTL required for the multiple FPGAs (Fig. 12.3).
Fig. 12.3Top-down partitioning for the multiple FPGAs
12.3.2 Synthesis at Netlist Level [1]
If the design is not partitioned at the architecture level, then the design can
be partitioned at the synthesis level. But this is not the better approach for
the complex design.
For the moderate gate count design, this may work after performing the
synthesis. During the initial synthesis, we can understand about the area and
resource requirement to realize the design. To have the better prototyping,
using the least area or less FPGA resources is one of the important
challenges. Under such circumstances, the design can be partitioned by
examining the area reports, block functional dependability, connectivity
between the different blocks and clock, voltage domain analysis.
Better way in this type of approach is to use the area report generated
during the synthesis to find the block-wise reports using the partitioning
tool. The main important task needs to be accomplished by partitioning tool
to find the IOs for each block and their connectivity to other blocks.
The tool like Synopsys Certify [1, 2] can give information about the
resources and IO count. What tool does is that it overestimates the resource
requirements but gives correct IO count [1, 2]. Most of the time,
overestimation of the resource requirement is better way to choose the

--- Page 282 ---
multiple FPGAs as during the later stage prototype team will be at least sure
that design will be realized (Fig. 12.4).
Fig. 12.4Partitioning at the netlist level

--- Page 283 ---
12.4 Need of the EDA Tools for the Design
Partitioning [1]
As discussed earlier, the design complexity of the SOC is very high and to
have the cost-effective prototype the option can be use of the plug-and-play
interface boards with the FPGA. This can give the quick and efficient
prototype solution if the timing at the interface level is matched. But the
serious trouble in the complex design can be observed if the design does not
fit into the single FPGA. Under such circumstances, it is essential to
partition the design into multiple FPGAs.
The serous partitioning problems may be due to logic density, speed,
multiple clocks in the design, and timing/synchronization issues. The
different ways into the design can be partitioned into multiple FPGAs
maybe at the architecture level or at the netlist level. The better visibility we
can get if the design is partitioned at the netlist level because we have the
information about the area estimation for the design from area reports.
In the present scenario, if we consider the multimillion gate SOCs then
the half or one-third of the design can be fitted on the larger density FPGA.
The major consideration while designing prototyping platform is the FPGA
equivalence of the logic. The FPGA may not have the sufficient BRAMs,
DSP block to accommodate the logic. Under such circumstances, it is
essential to find the number of FPGAs required for the prototyping. The pin
count of ASIC is always more than FPGA so the biggest bottleneck is the
pin availability and timing. Another important point to be considered is
tweaking of the ASIC RTL into FPGA equivalent. For example, gated
clocks, clock enable, and ASIC memories need modifications.
The partitioning can be manual or automatic, and the following are few
highlights and considerations.
12.4.1 Manual Partitioning
Most of the time, we try to partition the design manually. Consider the older
design and its environment and fewer changes to upgrade the design. Under
such circumstances as the older design is proven, the manual partitioning
can be cost effective. As there is no additional investments in the
partitioning tools, the overall time and budget of such platform are lesser as

--- Page 284 ---
compared to the automatic partitioning. The following are important points
that need to be considered while partitioning design manually:
1. Have the understanding of the design architecture and micro-
architecture. Keep the timing critical designs close to each other.  
2. Have the floorplan to understand the data, control paths, and other
interface boundaries for the design.  
3. Understand the FPGA resources in much more details, and then
partition the design into multiple FPGAs. If the resources of FPGA are
limited and design is partitioned into multiple FPGAs, the prototype
cannot yield into the desired performance.
 
4. If the enough number of IOs are not available, then use multiplexing
and take care that the additional logic should not be placed at the output
of MUX.
 
5. Use the available registers in the IO block to have the sequential
boundaries.  
6. Use the gated clock conversions and ASIC memory conversions at the
RTL level.  
The manual partitioning approach is suitable for the moderate gate
count designs having around 100K gate logic. But if the design has millions
of the logic gates and the multiple clock/power domains, then doing things
manually is never the cost-effective solution. The manual floorplanning for
the multimillion designs is not the good solution as it is always error prone.
It is not possible to keep the record of the RTL tweaks and conversions for
the manual partitioning (Fig. 12.5).

--- Page 285 ---
Fig. 12.5Design partitioning
12.4.2 Automatic Partitioning
Most of the EDA tool vendors like Synopsys offer the automatic
partitioning tools, and the following should be few of the features used for
the automatic partitioning of the design.
1. Partitioning tool should support TCL commands. If it supports
Synopsys Design Compiler (SDC) commands, then the ASIC
scripts/constraints can be used.
 
2. It should be able to define the probe points for the verification of the
design. It should allow the integration with the debug tools like Xilinx
ChipScope Pro, Intel FPGA signal Tap, and Synopsys Identify [1]!
 
3. Partitioning tool should support the FPGA prototyping board and the
environment.  
4. The tool should be able to optimize for the area constraints according
to the requirements.  
5. The tool should be able to understand the pin requirements and
should optimize the number of pins.  

--- Page 286 ---
6. It should be able to accommodate the small design changes at the
netlist level.  
7. It should be able to accommodate the large number of design changes
at the RTL level.  
8. It should give the resource estimation quickly for the target FPGA to
ensure that design can fit on the FPGA.  
9. It should identify the high-speed IO and clock lines and utilize them to
improve the timing.  
10.It should allow the allocation of the logic to every FPGA. Maximum
limit for the better prototyping can be 60 to 70% of the available
FPGA resources.
 
11. It should give the signal to trace assignment report for the detailed
analysis of the prototyping.  
Still there are limitations to identify the black box IP and BRAM and
DSP inference. So most of the time, we observe combined use of the
manual and automatic partitioning.
12.5 Synthesis for the Better Prototype Outcome
[1]
AS SOC designs are faster than the FPGA and logic density is larger, the
design partitioning for the million-gate SOC is the most important task. The
design can be partitioned before synthesis or after synthesis. The prototype
team needs to choose the correct approach for partitioning the design.
The truth is design may not run at the SOC speed and it is essential to
modify the SOC design into FPGA equivalent resources. So during the
synthesis, it is essential to have clarity about the architecture or initial
floorplan, constraints, and FPGA resources. Prototyping flow should
achieve the better performance as compared to SOC emulation, and that
is the major objective during the synthesis. There are multiple ways in
which the synthesis can be performed to achieve the better results. The
following are few of the approaches used during the synthesis.

--- Page 287 ---
12.5.1 Fast Synthesis for Initial Resource Estimation
If we chose the fast synthesis, then it can be useful for understanding the
initial or rough device utilization and the performance at the initial stage.
But in such type of synthesis, the full optimization is ignored by the
synthesis tool. The reason being the runtime is almost around two or three
times. But this can be useful to save the week/day time for the complex
designs and for the initial design partitioning.
12.5.2 Incremental Synthesis
The incremental synthesis is the better approach for the complex SOC
designs. The incremental efforts of P and R tools can be used efficiently
while synthesizing the larger density designs. The SOC design sub-blocks
or trees can be synthesized separately according to the version changes.
For example, consider the SOC design having 100 sub-blocks and the
RTL changes are incorporated in only 10 sub-blocks; then during increment
synthesis, the tool can synthesize the RTL for the 10 sub-blocks. This
reduces overall efforts and time during the synthesis phase.
That is, if the sub-block or tree architecture is not changed, then
synthesis tool ignores this and preserves the previous version. This reduces
the week/day time for the complex SOC synthesis.
The beauty of the EDA tool like Synopsys Certify [1] or the Xilinx P
and R tools [3] is that they preserve the hierarchy, previous version logic,
placement, constraints, mapping as during the re-synthesis and if the RTL is
not modified. It reduces the turnaround time.
If small portion of the design is modified, then due to incremental
synthesis the design runtime reduces and P and R tools can use the
synthesis results.
The prototype team should be able to use the features of the synthesis
and P and R tools. The combined use of these features can reduce the
significant amount of time during prototyping. Most important point is that
the P runtime and R runtime are always larger than the synthesis runtime for
the complex designs. So, the strategy should be use the synthesis and P and
R tools using the incremental flow (Fig. 12.6).

--- Page 288 ---
Fig. 12.6Design synthesis and implementation
The Xilinx EDA tool backend flow is shown in Fig. 12.7 [3].

--- Page 289 ---
Fig. 12.7Xilinx backend tool flow [3]
12.6 Constraints and Synthesis for FPGA Designs
[1]
This section discusses the use of Synopsys DC tool for the FPGA synthesis.
The FPGA synthesis commands are listed in the below table.
Command Description
set_port_is_pad 
<port_list> <design_list>
The command is useful to place attributes on the list of ports specified
in command. Attribute allows DC to map IO pads
set_pad_type <type of
pad> < port_list>
The command is used to choose the type of the pads to which design is
to be mapped
insert_pad The command is used to insert the pads

--- Page 290 ---
Command Description
replace_fpga The command is used to convert the synthesizable FPGA database to
the schematic. Instead of visualizing, the schematic has CLBs, IOBs,
and gates
The following steps can be followed for the FPGA synthesis using
Synopsys DC
1. Read the Verilog/VHDL design file. 
2. Set the design constraints.  
3. Insert the pads.  
4. Perform the design synthesis. 
5. Execute the replace_fpga command. 
6. Write the database.  
The sample script for the FPGA synthesis of top_processor_core is
shown below.
dc_shell > read –format verilog top_processor_core.vhd
dc_shell > create_clock clock –name clk –period 10
dc_shell > set_input_delay 2 –max – < list all the input ports using the
same command and required delay attribute>
dc_shell > set_port_is_pad
dc_shell> insert_pad
dc_shell> compile –map_effort high
dc_shell> report_timing
dc_shell> report_area
dc_shell> report_cell
The timing report consists of the timing path information and the data
required time, data arrival time, slack.
Area report gives the list of the following:

--- Page 291 ---
Number of ports
Number of cells
Number of nets
Number of references
Combinational area
Non-combinational area
Net interconnect area
Total cell area
Total area.
To get the information about the FPGA resources, the following
command can be used:
dc_shell > report_fpga –one_level
It gives the following information about the use of FPGA resources.
Function Generators:
Number of CLBs
Number of ports
Number of clock pads
Number of IOBs
Number of flip-flops
Number of tristate buffers
Total number of cells
To write the netlist in the database format, use the command
dc_shell > write-format db –hierarchy –output top_procesor_core.db
The synthesizable database (netlist) and timing information can be used
by the place and route tool. Few of the important scenarios and tweaks are
discussed in this section. 
1. Gated Clock instantiation: The gated clock structure for the SOC may
not be match with the FPGA equivalent structure, and hence it is 

--- Page 292 ---
essential to modify the RTL to infer the gated clock structure
(Figs. 12.8 and 12.9).
Fig. 12.8Gated clock used for the design
Fig. 12.9FPGA equivalent clock gating
2. SOC IPs: In most of the IPs, the RTL is not available, and hence it is
essential to have the FPGA equivalent of such IPs.  
3. ASIC/SOC Memories: The memory structure for the ASIC or SOC is
not identical with the FPGA memories, and hence it requires the
modification during the prototype stage.
 
4. Top-level pads: As FPGA tool does not understand about the
instantiation of the pad, it is essential to modify them during the
prototype. It does not handle the IO pad in the RTL and infers the
FPGA pad. So, it needs to leave the pads out with dangling connections
and inactive at the top-level boundary. For the prototype, replace each
IO pad instance with synthesizable model of FPGA equivalent.
The model should have the logical connections at the RTL level,
and that can be done by writing small piece of code in the RTL. For the
 

--- Page 293 ---
efficient prototype, prepare the SOC pad library. The basic FPGA IO
cell is as shown in Fig. 12.10.
Fig. 12.10FPGA basic IO cell
5. IPs in the netlist forms: The netlist form may not be the FPGA
equivalent and hence needs modification during prototyping. 
6. Leaf cells: Leaf cells from the ASIC library may not be understood by
the FPGA, and hence it needs modifications.  
7. Test Circuitry: The built-in self-test (BIST) and other tests or debug
circuit need to have the FPGA equivalent and hence needs the
modification.
 
8. Unused inputs: For the unused input pins, it is essential to tweak the
RTL.  
9. Generated clocks: During prototyping to achieve the better
performance, the generated clocks need to be modified by its FPGA
equivalent.
 
12.7 IO Pad Synthesis for FPGA
As FPGA tools do not understand about the instantiation of the pads, it is
essential to modify them during the prototype phase. It does not handle the
IO pad in the RTL and infers the FPGA pad. So, it needs to leave the pads
out with dangling connections and inactive at the top-level boundary. For

--- Page 294 ---
the prototype, replace each IO pad instance with synthesizable model of
FPGA equivalent.
The model should have the logical connections at the RTL level, and
that can be done by writing small piece of code in the RTL. For the efficient
prototype, prepare the SOC pad library. The basic IO cell for the FPGA is
shown in Fig. 12.10.
Use the following commands using Synopsys DC. For more
information on FPGA synthesis, refer Sect. 12.6 [2]
dc_shell > set_port_is_pad
dc_shell > insert_pad
dc_shell > compile –map_effort high
12.8 What Care I Should Take During Synthesis
and Prototyping?
12.8.1 Avoid Use of Latches
Although the latch-based design is better to save the power, it is advisable
to use flip-flop-based design. The flip-flop-based design can guarantee
about the clean timing paths.
12.8.2 Avoid Longer Combinational Paths
As inside the FPGA combinational logic is mapped using the LUTs, it is
recommended to avoid the longer combinational paths. Although the LUT
delay is uniform, the longer combinational paths degrade the performance
of the SOC prototype. It is advisable to break the long combinational paths
into the shorter paths by using the pipelined registers. Although there is
additional overhead on the area due to use of the pipelined registers, the
shorter path design is best placed, mapped, and routed using the adjacent
CLB resources. The practical scenario is described in the example.
Practical Scenario 1: The Impact of Registered Output:
: If the output of the design is not registered, then it has impact on the
other module. In the design, the output is combinational, and given as

--- Page 295 ---
input to other modules then it will increase the combinational delay in
the design. As the data path delay has increased, it affects the timing and
may violate the setup time. To avoid this, register all the inputs and
outputs.
FPGA Synthesis: In the FPGA design, the register-to-register path is
between the CLB flip-flops. Every CLB has flip-fops and the LUTs.
ASIC Synthesis: In the ASIC, the standard cells are used and the
register-to-register path is between the flip-flops. The standard cell
library has the logic gates and the flip-flops.
Consider the following design where the output is from
combinational logic that is output is not registered.
If q1_out drives other design blocks, then as stated above it increases
the delay in the data path. Let us consider the design scenario shown in
the above figure.
The output from the first design is q1_out and given to data_in input
of the second design. This will reduce speed of the design. The data
arrival time (AT) = Tpdff + tcombo1 + tecombo2, and the data required
time (RT) = Tclk-tsu. So for positive slack RT > = AT, and the period of
clock is Tclk = Tpdff + tcombo1 + tecombo2 + tsu.
If the delay of flip-flop (tpdff) = 1 ns, delay of combo logic 1
(tcombo1) = 0.5 ns, delay of combo logic 2 (tcombo2) = 0.5 ns, setup
time (tsu) = 0.5 ns, and hold time (th) = 0.25 ns, then the clock time
period (Tclk) = Tpdff + tcombo1 +tcombo2 +tsu = 2.5 ns and maximum
operating frequency is 400 MHz.
If inputs and outputs of all the designs are registered, then the design
has clean and shorter register path. Even it improves the performance of
the design.

--- Page 296 ---
The improved design is shown below, and it improves the register to
register path timing.
Practical Scenario 2: Registered Inputs and Outputs:
As the inputs and outputs of the design are registered, it has impact on
the performance of the design. The data path delay is improved by this
technique.
The clock time period (Tclk) is Tclk = Tpdff + tcombo1 + tsu for the
first design and for the delay of the second design (Tclk) is Tclk = Tpdff 
+ tcombo2 + tsu. If the delay of flip-flop (tpdff) = 1 ns, delay of combo
logic 1 (tcombo1) = 0.5 ns, delay of combo logic 2 (tcombo2) = 0.5 ns,
setup time (tsu) = 0.5 ns, and hold time (th) = 0.25 ns, then the clock time
period (Tclk) = Tpdff + tcombo1 +tsu = 2.0 ns and maximum operating
frequency is 500 MHz.
Thus, the performance of the design has improved. Previously,
without the registered inputs and registered output the frequency was
400 MHz and with the registered inputs and outputs the frequency is
500 MHz.
12.8.3 Avoid the Combinational Loops
To avoid the oscillatory behavior, it is recommended to avoid the
combinational loops. The oscillatory behavior is unpredictable, and it may
be due to the missing signals in the sensitivity list, incomplete case
statements, incomplete nested if statements.
12.8.4 Use Wrappers

--- Page 297 ---
Most of the FPGA vendor supports the RTL description in the generic logic
form or in the Synopsys Design Ware component form. So do not use the
technology-dependent cells. At the leaf level, introduce the technology-
specific details.
It is mandatory to take care that the source changes should have the
lesser impact on the design. For this, use the wrappers and make changes
inside the design elements. If the SOC architecture uses RAM, then make
changes inside the library elements rather than in the RTL. This improves
overall portability of the design.
12.8.5 Memory Modeling
If we consider the SOC design, then the memory is technology specific and
may not be FPGA equivalent. Under such circumstances, use the FPGA
compatible memory versions during prototype. As stated earlier, use the
wrappers around the technology-dependent elements in the design. This
should be done for the macros, RAMs in the technology library.
12.8.6 Use of core Generators
Use the Xilinx Core Generators, and specify the target technology, core
type, and initialization sequence. The FPGA tool is used to generate the
netlist and initialization files. Place and route tools use the netlist to perform
the placement of the functional block on the FPGA fabric. Initialization can
be accomplished by the template files. Instantiate the template files in the
design. Most of the time, we observe that the tool-generated wrapper file
consists of the functional stimulus data and can be used for functional
simulation of the design.
12.8.7 Formal Verification
The big question which needs to address is that how I can verify the
functionality of FPGA and SOC RAM? Whether they have the same
behavior or not? The answer is simple; it can be done by using formal
verification (FV) during the early stage of prototyping. This can verify the
equivalence checking for the FPGA and SOC RAM!
12.8.8 Blocks not Mapping on the FPGA
The analog blocks and IPs may not be directly mapped on the FPGA as the
RTL code or netlist of these blocks is not available. Under such

--- Page 298 ---
circumstance, use the evaluation boards supplied by the IP vendor or design
the functional equivalent FPGA for the IPs and interface them with the
FPGA.
12.8.9 Better Architecture Design
It is always a better approach to have the efficient architecture and micro-
architecture for the SOC and FPGA designs. The architecture document can
have the additional information about the tweaking or modification required
for the FPGA prototype.
12.8.10 Use Clock Logic at TOP LEVEL
For fine portability and modularity, keep the clock distribution
or generation logic at the top level.
12.8.11 Bottom-Up Approach
Use the bottom-up approach for the design, and this can be good to generate
the constraints at the block and chip level. Team can think about keeping
the high-level modules free from use of the parameters and generics.

--- Page 299 ---
12.9 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
The following are few of the important points to conclude the chapter:
1. The design should be well partitioned by considering the sequential
boundaries.  
2. The design can be partitioned at architecture, synthesis, and netlist
level.  
3. Use the design optimization and IO constraints while performing the
timing analysis.  
4. Logical partitioning may not be able to give the optimum result. So, use
the design partitioning tools while performing the partitioning. 
5. In the multiple clock domain designs, deploy the synchronizers. 
6. Use the clock gating conversions to get the FPGA equivalent for the
design.  
7. Avoid the combinational loops in the design as it results in the
oscillatory behavior. Use the registered input and registered output. 
8. Use only 60–70% of the FPGA resources to achieve better performance
for the prototype.  
This chapter has given us understanding about the synthesis for the SOC
and design implementation. Even we have discussed about the design
partitioning and different ways to accomplish the design partitioning.
The next chapter is focused on the debug and test techniques used during
the SOC prototype phase, the available EDA tools and equipment during
the testing phase.
Reference
1. www. springer. com: “ Advanced HDL Synthesis and SOC Prototyping: Vaibbhav Taraate”.

--- Page 300 ---
2. https:// www. synopsys. com/ 
3. https:// www. xilinx. com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 301 ---
(1)
 
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020
V. Taraate, Logic Synthesis and SOC Prototyping
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1314-5_13
13. SOC Debug and Test Scenarios
Vaibbhav Taraate1 
 
1 Rupee S T (Semiconductor Training @ Rs. 1), Pune, Maharashtra,
India
 
Vaibbhav Taraate
Email: vaibbhavt@gmail.com
“Better SOC debug and test plan can yield into the efficient
prototype for quick turnaround of the product idea.”
Abstract
The chapter discusses the debug, test challenges and the important features
of SOC prototyping boards. The prototype test phase is important and final
milestone, and during this, we try to capture the results. The performance of
the prototype is dependent on the partitioning, test, and verification plan. In
such scenario, the chapter discusses the important test and debug scenarios.
How to use few of the test equipment, ILA cores, and logic analyzer is also
discussed in this chapter.
KeywordsFPGA – Test – Debug – ILA – Partitioning – Clock – Reset –
Logic analyzer – Synthesis – Prototype
As discussed in the previous few chapters the million gate SOC designs can
be prototyped using the FPGA. The real challenge to achieve the desired
performance in such kind of the design is due to the multiple FPGA
architecture, design partitioning and the connectivity between them. The

--- Page 302 ---
chapter discusses about the risk, challenges and how to choose the target
FPGA to have the better SOC prototype.
13.1 SOC Design and Considerations
In the past few years while working in the field of the FPGA designs, I have
observed most of the time that the complex design does not fit on the single
FPGA. During the team discussions, the important aspects as a designer we
thought that let us tweak the architecture to find out is there any room for
the resources to accomodate the design using the single FPGA?
It was logical thought as well as the thought to avoid the use of multiple
FPGAs. The outcome of such kind of discussion was positive, and with the
architecture tweaking and using the synthesis tool directives to use the
FPGA resources efficiently, we were successful to map the design in single
FPGA.
While prototyping for the complex SOCs what should be our approach?
In the practical environments, every organization has their standard flows
while prototyping the SOCs. The team manager and leader can think about
when to start about the prototyping? At which stage? After achieving the
desired coverage goals at the block level? Or wait to complete the full
functional verification.
All these questions can be answered if we look into the prototype flow!
We cannot have the real estimation of the FPGA resources at the start and
even the logic which can be mapped inside the FPGA or logic mapped
outside the FPGA. As a team, we need to focus on the functional
correctness of the design at the start. So as a team lead, I should think about
the start of prototyping phase after passing all the basic tests at the sanity
level. At least the team members will be sure about the data passing from
one functional block to another functional block, and even they will be sure
about the basic functional correctness of the design.
If we try to use the waterfall model, that is first phase RTL design,
second phase RTL verification using the HDL, and then the final phase as
prototype and testing, then this may delay the project by few weeks or
months. Instead of sequential kick-off for the RTL design, verification, and
board bring-up phase, the concurrently teams can work  to achieve the
desired milestones in the better way.

--- Page 303 ---
What are the important tweaks during the prototype using FPGA?
The important point to consider is that what about the IO pad rings? What
about the large external memories? What about the analog blocks?
Effectively, we will not be able to map the large external memories, analog
blocks, and IO pad rings inside the FPGA!
At the architecture level, it should be decided which functionality
should be tested using the FPGA and what kind of prototyping boards are
required to test or emulate the overall SOC.
So let me put this in the real scenario of prototyping the SOCs with the
analog blocks and Hard IP cores. Practically, it is not possible to have the
FPGA netlist for analog blocks as well as hard IP blocks. In the absolute
reality, the IP design houses provide the evaluation boards and the prototype
team needs to create the SOC prototype platform with single or multiple
FPGAs interfaced with such type of the evaluation board to achieve the
desired performance and functionality. Let us discuss the important aspects
of such type of designs.
1. Interface signals: The FPGA and the evaluation board should have
compatible interfaces. If IOs are not compatible, then there will be
issue of the signal integrity.
 
2. Connectivity between FPGA and evaluation board: RTL should
provide the connectivity between the design functionality realized on
the FPGA board and external evaluation board.
 
3. Timing: It is one of the important aspects due to the interface delays
between the FPGA and the external IP board. So need to have clock
resource analysis with the inter-delay timing.
 
4. Synchronization: Booting the external hardware may take less time as
compared to FPGA logic, so during the prototype, care should be taken
that the FPGA bit stream should be loaded first inside the FPGA. Again
the synchronous and asynchronous reset or reset removal pulse
durations need to be analyzed.
 
5. Power supply: Should have the digital and analog ground isolation and
multiple voltage levels depending on the requirements. Even care 

--- Page 304 ---
should be taken that the FPGA and external board connectivity should
maintain the desired voltage and logic levels.
6. Mechanical assembly: The care should be taken to have the good and
durable mechanical assembly so that during the different geographical
locations/during transit, the board should not damage.
 
13.2 Prototyping Challenges and How to
Overcome Them?
How I can find the performance of the prototype?
Let us imagine the complex SOC design, and for the efficient prototype, we
need to have the estimation of FPGA resources. How I can find the correct
estimation is one of the challenges. Is there any efficient way to get the
accurate FPGA estimations and requirements? Answer at high level is big
‘no’; as stated earlier, the estimation of the required resources may not be
enough to choose the FPGA. The reason being we need to think about the
desired FPGA performance. Let us discuss the key parameters which need
to be thought to meet the performance requirements.
Please recall that the estimating the design resources using synthesis
tool can give us information about the ballpark figure. This technique can
give information of the performance for the design at high level. The
performance capture using the synthesis tool is without the routing delays
but using the placement and routing tool, the timing performance can be
evaluated. The parameter on which the FPGA performance is dependent is
the constraints. The constraints are used by the synthesis, place, and route
tool to meet the desired performance.
If I have multiple FPGA design, then following key parameters affect
the performance of the design:
1. Pipelined architecture: The design without pipelining runs with less
speed as compared to the design using pipelined architecture. So care
should be taken to have the multiple pipelined stage controllers for the
design.
 

--- Page 305 ---
2. FPGA device utilization: If the FPGA utilization crosses almost
around 60%, then the design performance slows down. The reason
being the congestion in the placement and routing. Even such kind of
design has high interconnect delays and hence slower speed. Refer
Chap. 11 for the information about the interconnect delays and timing.
 
3. Fan-out and load: The design having high fan-out runs slower as
compared to the design having low fan-out.  
4. Synthesis tool and environment: The use of the synthesis tool to
optimize the design is one of the factors which are responsible for the
speed of the design.
 
5. Inter-FPGA connectivity: The main important factor to limit the
overall speed of the prototype in the multiple FPGA system is
interconnection delays and connectivity. This is due to the inter-FPGA
connectivity and IO speed. As most of us know that IO speed is much
lower as compared to the speed of the logic on the FPGA fabric.
 
6. Multiplexing features: Pin multiplexing is one of the major factors to
limit the speed of the prototype. Consider the practical example of use
of the multiplexed IO, and if the n bit multiplexed logic runs at the
operating frequency of 25 MHz, then to sample the n bit signals, the
multiplexed input should run at n times of 25 MHz.
 
7. Delays: The propagation delays on the board and data rate of individual
signals are other factors responsible for limiting the FPGA
performance.
 
13.3 Multiple FPGA Architecture and Limiting
Factors
As stated earlier if the design does not fit in the single FPGA, then we need
to use the multiple FPGAs to prototype the SOC. Let us think that, is there
any limit for the use of multiple FPGAs? Theoretically, I can document the
design at the architecture level by using many FPGAs, but the efficient

--- Page 306 ---
prototype is such that the SOC can be validated using the minimum number
of FPGAs and following are the reasons:
Interconnectivity between multiple FPGA: In the multiple FPGA
architecture, the interconnectivity depends upon the use of the number of
FPGAs. As the number of FPGA grows in the system, there are issues
like signal integrity and large interconnect delays. The system may
become slow and may not yield the desired performance. Under such
circumstances, it is recommended to use the fewer FPGAs by tweaking
the architecture. To overcome the inter-FPGA connectivity issue, use the
time-division multiplexing for the IOs using the higher clock frequency.
In such kind of techniques, the risk is the clock rate as the multiplexed
IOs need to run at higher clock rate as compared to the logic on the
FPGA fabric.
Design partitioning: Manual design partitioning is one of the most
important bottlenecks in the multi-FPGA system as the designer needs to
think about the netlists for the multiple FPGAs and their connectivity. As
the design partitioning using the tools is the complex task and manual
design partitioning is not the feasible solutions in the multi-FPGA system
design, the prototype team can think about the mix of the partitioning
techniques.
Propagation of signals and connectivity: In the multi-FPGA system,
another important issue is the settling time required for the signal due to
the inter-FPGA connectivity. The IO delays add up the cumulative effect,
and it slows down the system.
Clock generation and clock distribution: For the synchronous multiple
FPGA system, the clock skew is one of the limiting factors in achieving
the desired performance. It becomes additional overhead for the designer
to manage the clock distribution on the board to balance the clocking
skew.
Use of multiple licenses during prototype: Most of the time we observe
that for the multi FPGA design, the netlist for the each FPGA should be
generated concurrently. This reduces the overall time required during the
prototyping, and it improves the productivity of the team. But this
increases the testing, debug, and prototype cost as more number of design
engineers need to be employed to achieve the same and needs number
of licenses.

--- Page 307 ---
13.4 Board Bring-Up and What to Test?
What should be the strategy while testing the million gate SOC? This is the
first important question needs to be answered! As a prototype team, there
should be debug and testing plan in place. The better debugging plan to test
the single FPGA design or multiple FPGA design can create the significant
amount of the improvement in the productivity for the SOC design.
Following are few important steps need to be followed for the larger SOC
designs.
1. Test the board for basic read and writes  
2. Test the add-on boards and connectivity  
3. Configure the single FPGA with the smaller design 
4. Configure multiple FPGAs with the deign partitioning 
5. Understand the implementation issues  
6. Use the actual SOC design and test cases 
7. Check for the issues and fix them  
8. Document the results.  
13.5 Debug Plan and Checklist
The board bring-up and debug plan need to be efficiently documented
during the design planning and the architecture phase. It is not possible that
the design downloaded on the FPGA can work right for the first time. It is
one of the difficult tasks to debug the design at the board level. For the
single as well as multiple FPGA designs, following can be included in the
debug plan:

--- Page 308 ---
1. Basic test needs to be carried out for the single FPGA designs 
2. Test for the add-on boards interfaced with FPGA 
3. High-speed IO tests  
4. Interface test  
5. Testing and debug using logic analyzer  
6. Multiple FPGA connectivity and debug.  
The main objective of all above is to catch the bugs at the board level.
Most of the bugs may not be found during the functional verification, and
the better debug plan using the EDA tools, logic analyzers, and transactors
can give the more visibility to such kind of the bugs. These bugs at system
level can be identified and fixed at the synthesis, P and R or at the board
level. Following can be few of the guidelines used for debugging the FPGA
prototype (Table 13.1).
Table 13.1Few guidelines for the debug
Guideline Description
Use the smaller designUse the smaller design to configure the single FPGA at the first time and
carry out the basic read/write tests
Check for the add-on
board connectivity
Check for the add-on board connectivity with the FPGA
Check for the IO Check for the working of the multiplexed IOs
Check for the multiple
FPGA connectivity
Check for the multiple FPGA connectivity by partitioning the smaller
design across multiple FPGAs
Check for the IO pad
configuration
Check whether the IOs are configured in the correct manner or not?
Check for the external
world connectivity
Check for the connectivity with the external boards like flash controller
interface, DDR interface
Check for the external
chipset and IP
interfaces
Whether the IPs and the chipset are having the required behavior need to
be checked
Use Xilinx IO delayUse programmable IO delays to control the IO timings and to establish the

--- Page 309 ---
Guideline Description
elements connectivity with the external element
Tweak the clock rateFor the higher clock rate, the system is not working for the read or write;
then to ensure and conclude the issue, reduce the clock rate. If at low clock
rate the system responds, then try to debug the issue for higher clock rate
Check for the bus
connectivity
Check and confirm the connectivity between the FPGA and logic analyzer
for the little and big endianness
Check for the
termination
impedances
Most of the time at the board level, design does not work due to wrong
termination
High-speed IO testCheck for the high-speed transceivers for the gigabit data transfer, and
then test the protocol
13.5.1 Basic Tests for the FPGA
Run the basic tests to understand the programmability of the FPGA.
1. Read/Write Test: Read and write the FPGA registers and confirm the
FPGA is configured by the correct bit map file.  
2. Counter Test: Use the existing switches on the FPGA board to check
the connectivity, and check for the clock and reset for the programmed
FPGA.
 
13.5.2 Add-On Board Tests
Write a small routine to configure the add-on boards interfaced with the
FPGA and confirm that the FPGA can read or write the information from
the add-on boards. Debug team can use small routine to configure the
multiple registers on the main FPGA board and on the add-on board and
confirm the connectivity and configuration.
13.5.3 Test the External Logic Analyzer Buses
Test the logic analyzer bus working with the main FPGA board. The
transfer of the small packet from the FPGA bus can confirm the
connectivity.
13.5.4 Multiple FPGA Connectivity and IO Test
Check for the pin multiplexing and high-speed time-division multiplexing.
Create the test environment to check for the TDM and data rate at the

--- Page 310 ---
multiplexed IO pins.
13.5.5 Test for the Multiple FPGA Partitioning
If the prototype has the multiple FPGAs in the design, then please check for
the inter-FPGA communication by writing the small design. Small design to
ensure the connectivity between FPGA can be partitioned across the
multiple FPGAs quickly. This can be small controllers for similar kind of
read/write inside the multiple FPGAs.
13.6 What Are Different Issues on the FPGA
Boards
Document the major issues on the board and action plan to test for them.
Few of the issues are listed in Table 13.2.
Table 13.2Board testing issues and solutions
Debug issue Type Description Action
Design does not
work at higher clock
Timing The design might have the
timing violations at high
speed, and to confirm that,
reduce the clock rate and then
check for the design. If the
design works at the lower
clock rate, then debug
Go through the
implementation timing
report and check for
warnings. Check for the
critical paths. Missing
constraints
The IO multiplexing
does not work
IO speed This may be due to the
improper ratio of the system
clock at which design works
and transfer clock at which
data is transferred
Check for the timing
constraints for the transfer
clock and system clock.
Check for the timing report
Design does not
work at low clock
frequency
Timing This may be due to hold
violation
Check for the timing reports
and constraints, and then,
fix them by tweaking the
min-max analysis
Design does not
have the timing
violation during P
and R, but the
design has issue at
board level
Board delaysOne of the reason may be the
on-board delays are not
considered during the timing
analysis
Check for the on-board
delays from vendor and
include them during the
timing analysis. Use the
safety delay margin or
tweak IO delays
The design does not
work for the
Timing The issue is metastability and
synchronization
Check for the use of
synchronization for the

--- Page 311 ---
Debug issue Type Description Action
multiple FPGAs
having different
clock domains
multiple clock domain
designs. One more reason
may be design partitioning
at the multiple clock domain
boundaries
The design has gated
clock and not
working on the
board
Timing
violation
The design may have the hold
time violations
Check for the gated clock
conversions. Check for the
non-convertible clocks and
the warning reports
Data is available at
the output of launch
FPGA pad but not
captured in the input
register of capture
flip-flop
IO
configuration
Issue
This may be issue on board
due to Io standards
Check the single-ended IO
configuration and
differential IO
configuration. Make sure
the correct IO standards are
used during IO mapping
The design works
for some conditions
but not for all the
conditions
IO
connectivity
May be due to the improper
termination of the IO
Check for the IO
impedances at transmitting
and receiving end. Check
more details in the FPGA
vendor-specific digital
controlled impedances
The design works
individually on
FPGA but not
working when
configured on the
multiple FPGAs
IO
connectivity
This may be due to the IO
connectivity, IO voltage
levels, signal levels
Check for the IO constraints
and IO pin mapping. Even
check for the IO termination
The FPGA boards
have multiple
cables, and the
design does not
work
Connectivity
or cable faults
This may be due to
termination impedance,
delays, timing violation, or
signal integrity
Check for the termination
impedances for each cable,
and then use the vendor-
dependent data and fix the
issue
13.7 Testing for the Multiple FPGA Interface
Following can be the strategies for the design testing for the multiple
FPGA:
1. Timing checks for the design partitioned at the system level. 
2. The effect of the redundant logic or logic removal on the connectivity
across multiple FPGAs.  

--- Page 312 ---
3. Is the inter-FPGA connectivity is intact. This can be tested by
read/write transactions across the multiple FPGAs.  
4. Whether the gated clocks are mapped into the FPGA equivalent or the
design exhibits some issue due to the non-convertible clocking using
MUX.
 
5. Are there any timing violations due to the internally generated clocks? 
6. Is the multiplexed interconnects are working at the transfer clock speed
or need to tweak the transfer clock.  
7. The compatibility of the interconnects and interfaces with reference to
the source and sink currents at board level.  
8. Whether all the pin locations and constraints are validated. 
Consider the practical issue at the board level while communicating
between the multiple FPGAs (Fig. 13.1).
Fig. 13.1Multiple FPGA IO transfer issue
Consider the launch and capture FPGA has System_clk and the design
runs at the system clock frequency. The IO signal is launched using the
Transfer_clk and captured at the input of de-MUX using the Transfer_clk.
The maximum frequency can be calculated by using
Fmax = (1/ (Tmux_delay+Ton_board+Tdemux_in))

--- Page 313 ---
Where Tmux_delay = Output delay of multiplexer
Ton_board= On board delay
Tdemux_in= Input delay at the capture FPGA
For example consider Tmux_delay = 4 nsec
     Ton_board = 2 nsec
Tdemux_in= 2 nsec
Then Fmax= 1/8 nsec= 125 MHz
For the safer side, take tolerance in the design around 1 ns; then, the
maximum frequency for the design is 111.11 MHz.
The question is that whether the design works at this frequency. If you
refer Chap. 11, I have stated that IO multiplexing using n: 1 MUX needs the
transfer clock of n*system_clock. Now if the system_clock is 25 MHz, then
the transfer_clk should be minimum 100 MHz or maximum 125 MHz. But
practically, it is not possible to achieve this clock rate to transfer the IO
signal.
Practically, the maximum design frequency of such type of multiplexed
IO is limited by the clock latency. If the transfer clock frequency is
111.11 MHz, then the System_clk frequency should be from 12.35 to
15.70 MHz.
So the prototype team should
1. Calculate the maximum transfer frequency using the IO delays, on-
board delays, and additional tolerance margin delay  
2. Find the ratio of the system_clk and transfer_clk  
3. Give the constraints in synthesis and P and R for the transfer_clk and
system_clk  
4. Give the clock to clock constraints in the synthesis and P and R for the
transfer_clk and System_clk.  
13.8 Debug Logic and Use of Logic Analyzers
The following section discusses the use of the logic analyzers and few
practical considerations and scenarios while debugging the design.

--- Page 314 ---
FPGA Debug:
1. Feature of the EDA tool to view the internal nodes  
2. Tool should observe the FPGA boundary and the FPGA surrounding
logic  
3. Debug and testing, characterization of the high-speed IO: For the fast
IOs working at 1 MHz, the PC board traces act as transmission line and
due to that issue of the signal integrity.
 
13.8.1 Probing Using IO Pins
Use the FPGA IO pins and probe using logic analyzer (Fig. 13.2).
Fig. 13.2Probing using the probe points
The required signals to probe can be routed at the FPGA pins and can be
tested using the external logic analyzer. But for the design which needs the
larger number of signals to probe, this is not the best solution as there is
always limitation on the FPGA pin count.
13.8.2 Use the Test MUX
The advantage is that it needs the less number of pins, but the issue is that
the probing of MUX output lines is only possible (Fig. 13.3).

--- Page 315 ---
Fig. 13.3Test MUX
If 16 signals need to probe, then use the 4X 4:1 MUX and two select
lines. At the Output_pins, four signals can be available depending on the
status of the select_pins, and they can be used by the external logic analyzer
for debug.
13.8.3 Use of Logic Analyzer: Practical Scenario (to Detect the
Data Packet Is Corrupted)
Consider the FPGA design which has multiple state machine controllers and
the other associated interfaces like Video/Audio CODEC, 10/100 MB
Ethernet interface, and other physical interfaces. If the data packet
transferred from the Ethernet is corrupted and not identified at the
functional simulation, then the overall design has the bug. Under such
circumstances, it is essential to probe the state machine controller designed
to accept the data packets from the Ethernet.
Use the logic analyzer, and try to probe the state machine controller by
identifying the state of the state machine controller where packet is
corrupted. So look inside the FPGA before the corrupted packet and probe
the design. Identify the state where packet is corrupted and trigger the logic
analyzer for probing.
Create the debugging scenario in the simulation and fix the issue
(Fig. 13.4).

--- Page 316 ---
Fig. 13.4Logic analyzer to detect the corrupted data packet
13.8.4 Oscilloscope to Debug the Design
Another debug solution is using the oscilloscope to monitor the signals at
the FPGA boundary. It is better to have the oscilloscope to monitor the
mixed signals. The analog and digital channels can monitor the behavior of
the FPGA and the signal activity at the FPGA boundary.
Consider the DDR controller interfaced with the FPGA, and the address
is updated from 01FFH to 0200H, but the issue is in the reading of the data.
During the previous operation using the read address the data was read into
the FPGA from the memory but now the issue in the read. This needs to be
debug, and under such scenarios, the mixed signal oscilloscope can be used
to monitor the behavior of the signal at the FPGA boundary.
By triggering the oscilloscope for this event, the nature of the read
address select can be captured. The reason may be the skew, slow transition
of the signal, or weak driving strength. This can be fixed at the design level
and at the board level (Fig. 13.5).

--- Page 317 ---
Fig. 13.5Mixed signal oscilloscope for debug
13.8.5 Debugging Using ILA Cores
To select many nodes, the better technique is to use the inbuilt or integrated
logic analyzer (ILA) with block RAM (BRAM). This is inexpensive
solution, and no additional pins are required. But it increases the size of the
memory inside the FPGA. In this mechanism, the required nodes can be
selected and then traces captured and sent to ChipScope Pro via JTAG
(Fig. 13.6).
Fig. 13.6Use of ILA cores for debugging
The use of the ChipScope Pro to establish communication via JTAG
with the ILA is shown in Fig. 13.7.

--- Page 318 ---
Fig. 13.7Use of Xilinx ChipScope Pro for debugging [1]
There are ways to insert the ILA into the design. They can be
instantiated at the RTL level; then perform the design synthesis, place-route
the design, and then generate the bit-stream file.
The other way is to insert the ILA blocks depending on the requirements
into the pre-synthesized design and then perform the place-route and
generate the bit file. The ChipScope can download the bit stream file into
FPGA including the ILA cores.
As shown the JTAG controller block is interfaced with the ILA cores,
and the data can be taken out from the ILA cores through JTAG and can be
viewed by ChipScope Pro at host PC (Fig. 13.8).

--- Page 319 ---
Fig. 13.8ChipScope Pro view during debugging [1]
13.9 System-Level Verification and Debugging
For the better verification outcome, use the integration of the existing EDA
tool environment, software models, and the FPGA prototyping boards. This
can be treated as hybrid verification. This allows the overall verification and
testing of the FPGA prototype with high verification coverage goals and
even the detection of the bugs which were not determined in the early
verification phase.
1. There are industry standard cycle-based and event-based simulator
available to enable the verification task to have more functional
coverage. Even the transactors and transaction-level modeling can be
used to verify million gate count design.
 

--- Page 320 ---
Is it possible that if we connect the simulator with the system and it
works in the first attempt? Answer is big no as there are different scenarios,
interfaces, and data transfer issues for the complex SOC design.
The verification and debugging needs significant amount of efforts, and
it is a time-consuming task.
For the moderate gate count design, the simulation to understand and to
correct the functional mismatches can serve the purpose. But for the million
gate SOC designs, the verification and debugging is the rigorous and time-
consuming task. Almost around the 60–70% of the design cycle time is
invested in the verification of the SOC. If we consider the FPGA prototype
then for the RTL coding, just around 10–15% design cycle time is required.
And for the remaining phases from the synthesis to the board bring-up, it
consumes around 85–90% of design cycle time.
Following can be two important approaches to verify the million gate
SOC.
13.9.1 Hardware/Software Co-verification
In this, the signal-level bidirectional link can be used from simulator to the
FPGA prototype. By using the simulator API calls, the communication can
be established to verify the design under test. This can be used for the early
detection of the bugs by writing the automated testbench. But if more
functions need to verify, then such type of verification approach slows
down the overall speed.
The strategy is to have the hardware/software co-verification by using
the bidirectional cycle accurate link between the FPGA prototyping board
and the simulator. This can be accomplished by having the synthesizable
wrapper for the Verilog or VHDL and other wrapper for the software
simulator. The synthesizable design can be controlled by the hardware
wrappers, and the non-synthesizable code can be controlled by the
simulator. In this, the design is controlled by the simulator testbench, and
the data from hardware and software wrapper can be given to the
bidirectional PLI interface.
But we can say that this type of approach has limitation as the hardware
works at high speed and simulator at low operating frequency so may not be
viable for the real-time interface. If the monitoring of the more internal
registers is the requirement, then this slows the performance.

--- Page 321 ---
13.9.2 Transactors and Transaction-Level Modeling
This is one of the approaches which are recommended for the hybrid
prototyping, and in this the transaction link is used between the simulator
and FPGA prototype. This can be achieved by having the testbench at the
system level.
This can be done by using the System-C environment by using the
transactors at the host PC software and DUT in the hardware. If the
bidirectional link is established between the virtual model and the FPGA
board, then by passing the message from the transactor, the communication
can be established. This type of verification strategy results into faster
verification as compared to the hardware/software co-verification
(Fig. 13.9).
Fig. 13.9Transactor calls using System C
13.10 SOC Prototyping Future
Over the past decade, we have witnessed the substantial growth in the VLSI
areas. The EDA companies and the chip manufacturing houses have
evolved the nanometer SOC designs. In such circumstances, the
miniaturization era is at the verge of evolution of the new trends and
technological changes.
1. Artificial intelligence: The need of this century is innovation of the
products using the artificial intelligence mechanisms. The SOCs can be
designed by embedding the artificial intelligence and algorithms. As the
process node is shrinking further, there may be evolution like
embedding the intelligence in the SOC. The SOCs can be used in the
general-purpose applications or in any kind of the sophisticated system;
 

--- Page 322 ---
the intelligence embedded can be controlled and configured using the
re-programmability using the complex FPGAs.
2. Quantum computing: The algorithms using quantum mechanism to
improve the design speeds will be evolved in the future. The prize of
the quantum computing machines will drop exponentially in the next
few decades. We will really witness the high-speed low power ASIC
designs and FPGA prototyping using the new evolved techniques.
 
3. High-density FPGAs: We will witness the FPGA evolution using the
lower process node. The evolution can give us the intelligent and high-
density FPGAs having high-speed interconnect, neural network cores
and capability, and programmable intelligence. These FPGAs can be
used to validate the SOC designs in the area of
1. High-resolution and high-speed video processing 
2. Testing of the neural network algorithms 
3. Medical imaging and diagnosis  
4. Satellite communications  
5. Artificial intelligence.  
 

--- Page 323 ---
13.11 Important Points to Conclude the Chapter
Following are few of the points to conclude the chapter:
1. The prototyping using the single and multiple FPGA designs should
have the test and debug plan.  
2. Use the checklist for the better test and debug results. 
3. Use the basic tests to find the FPGA connectivity.  
4. Use the BIST logic for better outcome and the test results. 
5. Use ILA cores and logic analyzers while performing the test and debug. 
Reference
1. www. xilinx. com.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 324 ---
Appendix: Xilinx 7 Series FamilyThe Xilinx 7 series FPGA family, comparison with the feature summary are listed below. For moreinformation, visit www. xilinx. com .
Xilinx 7 Series Family Comparison
Max. capabilitySpartan-7Artix-7 Kintex-7 Virtex-7
Logic cells102K 215K 478K 1955K
Block RAM (1) 4.2 Mb 13 Mb 34 Mb 68 Mb
DSP slices 160 740 1920 3600
DSP performance(2) 176 GMAC/s929 GMAC/s 2845 GMAC/s 5335 GMAC/s
Transceivers– 16 32 96
Transceiver speed– 6.6 Gb/s 12.5 Gb/s 28.05 Gb/s
Serial bandwidth– 211 Gb/s 800 Gb/s 2784 Gb/s
PCIe interface– x4 Gen2 x8 Gen2 x8 Gen3
Memory interface800 Mb/s 1066 Mb/s 1866 Mb/s 1866 Mb/s
I/O pins 400 500 500 1200
I/O voltage1.2–3.3 V 1.2–3.3 V 1.2–3.3 V 1.2–3.3 V
Package optionsLow-cost, wire-bond Low-cost, wire-bond, lidlessflip-chip Lidless flip-chip and high-performanceflip-chip Highest performance-flip-chip
Notes:1. Additional memory available in the form of distributed RAM2. Peak DSP performance numbers are based on symmetrical filter implementation
Virtex 7 FPGA Feature Summary
Device (1) Logiccells Configurable logicblocks (CLBs)DSPslices(3)
Block RAM
blocks (4) CMTs(5) PCIe(6) GTXGTHGTZXADCblocksTotalI/Obanks(7)
MaxuserI/O(8)
SLRs(9)
Slices(2) MaxdistributedRAM (Kb)
18Kb36KbMax(Kb)
XC7V585T562,72091,0506938 1260159079528,62018 3 36 0 0 1 17 850N/A
XC7V2000T1,954,560305,40021,55021602584129246,51224 4 36 0 0 1 24 12004
XC7VX330T326,40051,0004388 1120150075027,00014 2 0 28 0 1 14 700N/A
XC7VX415T412,16064,4006525 2160176088031,68012 2 0 48 0 1 12 600N/A
XC7VX485T485,76075,9008175 28002060103037,09014 4 56 0 0 1 14 700N/A
XC7VX550T554,24096,6008725 28802360118042,49020 2 0 80 0 1 16 600N/A
XC7VX690T693,120108,30010,88836002940147052,92020 3 0 80 0 1 20 1000N/A
XC7VX990T979,200153,00013,83836003000150054,00018 3 0 72 0 1 18 900N/A
XC7VX1140T1,139,200179,00017,70033603760188067,69024 4 0 96 0 1 22 11004
XC7VH590T590,48090,7008850 1680188094033,84012 2 0 48 8 1 12 6002
XC7VH870T976,160136,90013,27525202820141050,76018 3 0 72 16 1 6 3003
Notes:1. EasyPath TM -7 FPGAs are also available to provide a fast, simple, and risk-free solution for costreducing Virtex-7 T and Virtex-7 XT FPGA designs

--- Page 325 ---
2. Each 7 series FPGA slice contains four LUTs and eight flip-flops; only some slices can use their LUTs asdistributed RAM or SRLs3. Each DSP slice contains a pre-adder, a 25 × 18 multiplier, an adder, and an accumulator4. Block RAMs are fundamentally 36 Kb in size; each block can also be used as two independent 18 Kbblocks5. Each CMT contains one MMCM and one PLL6. Virtex-7 T FPGA Interface Blocks for PCI Express support up to x8 Gen 2. Virtex-7 XT and Virtex-7 HTInterface Blocks for PCI Express support up to x8 Gen 3, with the exception of the XC7VX495T device,which supports xB Gen 27. Does not include configuration Bank 08. This number does not include GTX, GTH, or GTZ transceivers9. Super logic regions (SLAs) are the constituent parts of FPGAs that use SSI technology. Virtex-7 HTdevices use SSI technology to connect SLRs with 28.05 Gb/s transceivers
Xilinx Artix, Kintex, Virtex 7 ordering information
For more information, please use the following linkhttp:// www. xilinx. com/ 
Index
AADCAddersAlgorithmsAlteraAnalogAnalog blocksAnalog equivalent boardsAnalyzeAPIA place and route tool useApplication-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC)ArchitectureArchitecture and micro-architectureArchitecture/design changesArea and powerArea minimizationArea reportArea, speed and powerARM IPArtificial intelligence

--- Page 326 ---
Artix-7ASIC clock gatingASIC libraryASIC memoriesASIC synthesisASIC testingAsynchronous clearAsynchronous pathAttributeAudio processorsAutomaticAutomatic partitioning
BBackend flowBackend toolBandwidthBase arrayBasic testsBinary to gray64 bit ECC32x32 bit multiplier4-bit registerBit-streamBlock level constraintsBlock RAM (BRAM)Board layoutBottom-UpBRAM 16X2Built In Self Test (BIST)Bus arbiter
CCable delayCapacitanceCascadeCaseCase-end caseCell layoutCell libraryChanneled gate arrayChannel less gate arrayCharacterizeCheck_designChipScope proCircular bufferCLBClock dividerClock domainClock enableClock gatingClock gating cellsClock gating logic

--- Page 327 ---
Clock groupsClocking architectureClocking strategiesClock Management Tiles (CMT)Clock multiplexingClock network delayClock network latencyClock skewClock spineClock tree synthesisCombinational boundariesCombinational loopsCombinational pathsCompatible interfacesCompileCompilerComplex functionalityConcurrencyConfigurationConfiguration, test and debugCongestionConstraintsContent addressableControllabilityCore generatorsCoverage goalsCo-verificationCo-verification and use of IPsCustom interfacesCycle based
DDACDaisy chainingData and control pathData arrival timeData convergenceData integrityData pathDDR3 controllerDDR3 memory controllerDebugDebug and test circuitryDebug and the test phaseDebug planDecryptedDeferred interconnectDelayDesignDesign Compiler (DC)Design constraintsDesign libraryDesign objects

--- Page 328 ---
Design partitioningDesign planningDesign Rule Constraints (DRC)DesignWareDesignWare libraryDifferential signalsDigitalDigital communicationDirect port connectionsDistributed RAMDon’t touchDSPDSP algorithmDSP blockDSP48E1DSP functionalityDual portDual port RAMs50% duty cycleDynamic connectivity
EEDA toolEfficient synthesisEfforts levelsElaborateEmulationEnableEncrypted keyEncrypted source codeEntityEntropy codingError correctionsEstimation of logicEven and odd parityEvent based simulatorExternal IP boardExternal memories
FFabricationFalse pathFanoutField-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)FIFOFinite State Machine (FSM)FlattenedFloorplanFloor planning toolFormal Verification (FV)FPGA architectureFPGA bit-stream fileFPGA boundary

--- Page 329 ---
FPGA clock gatingFPGA connectivityFPGA editorsFPGA equivalent designFPGA fabricFPGA interfacesFPGA IOFPGA netlistFPGA padFPGA performanceFPGA prototyping boardFPGA resourcesFPGA synthesisFSM controllersFSM synthesisFull customFunctional and timing proven IPsFunctional correctnessFunctional coverageFunctional verification
GGate arrayGated clockGated clock implementationGate-level netlistGating strategyGDSIIGeneral purpose registersGenerated clocksGlitchesGlobalGlobal clockGlue logicGray to binaryGroupGroupingGroup_pathGTECH
HHamming codeHard IPHard IP coresHardware Construction Language (HCL)Hardware softwareHD sizeH.264 encoderHierarchicalHierarchical designsHigh impedanceHigh performance IOBHigh speed interfaces

--- Page 330 ---
High speed IOHold slackHold violations
IIEEE standard 802.3-2005If elseIf-then-elseILA blocksImplementation toolImprovementIn circuit debugging toolIncomplete sensitivity listIncremental compilationIncremental flowIncremental synthesisInferenceInitial synthesisInstantiationInstruction executionIntegrated Logic Analyzer (ILA)Intended latchesInterconnect delaysInterconnect issuesInterconnectivityInterfaceInterface delaysInter-FPGA communicationInternal MemoryInternational Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS)IO availabilityIO cellIO columnsIO delaysIO multiplexingIO PADIO PAD instanceIO PAD ringsIO pinsIO placementIO planningIO schemesIO speedIO standardsIO testsIO voltageIPIP blocksIP coresIP validation
JJTAG

--- Page 331 ---
JTAG controller
LLarger area multipliersLarger decoding logicLatch based designLatchesLC tank circuitLibrariesLink libraryLocalLogical partitioningLogic analyzerLogic and physical synthesisLogic densityLogic duplicationLogic replicationLogic synthesisLonger runtimeLow latencyLow power gigabit transceiverLUT delayLUTsLVDS
MMacrosManualManual floorplanningMap_effortMappingMax_capacitanceMax_fanoutMaximum operating frequencyMaximum transfer frequencyMax_transitionMealy machineMemory generatorMemory structureMetastable stateMicro-architectureMigrationMin or maxMixed connectivityMoore machinesMulticycle and false pathMulticycle pathMultiple architectureMultiple clock domainsMultiple domainsMultiple FPGAMultiple pipelined stageMultiple power domain

--- Page 332 ---
Multiple processMultiple process descriptionMultiplexed IO2:1 multiplexerMultiplexersMultiplier chainMultiply and Accumulate (MAC)MultitaskingMux based logic
NNano-meterNegative edgeNested if-then-elseNetlistNetsNon-Return-to-Zero (NRZ)NRE cost
OObservabilityOff-FPGAOn-board delaysOn-chip delaysOn-FPGAOptimizationOptimization constraintsOscillatory behaviorOscilloscopeOutput delay
PPad libraryP and RP and R runtimeP and R toolParallel logicParallel logic and priority designParallel to serial converterParityPartitioningPartitioning boundaries, ThePartitioning toolPartitionsPattern detectorPCIePCIe Ethernet MAC PhyPhysical designPhysical IPPin countPin multiplexingPin placementsPin requirements

--- Page 333 ---
Pipelined registersPipelined stagePipeliningPlace and routePlacementPlacement and routingPlacement and routing toolsPLLPort interfacesPortsPositive edgePositive slackPost layout verificationPower constraintsPower dissipationPowerplanPower planningPre-synthesized netlistPrioritiesPriority encodersPriority logicProbe pointsProcessorsProgrammable switchesPropagation delayPrototypePrototype and testingPrototype flowPrototyping boardsPrototyping flow
RRAMsRC time constantReadReceiversRecompilationReference framesReferencesRegister arrayRegister balancingRegistered inputsRegistered outputRegister to register pathRegister to register timing pathRegister Transfer Level (RTL)Report_timingReset logicResource sharingRing oscillatorsRing type connectivityRising edgeRobots

--- Page 334 ---
ROMRound-robinRoutingRouting delaysRTL designRTL design guidelinesRTL designsRTL Source code of IPRTL synthesisRTL tweakRTL verification
SSearch_pathSemiconductorSemi-customSensitivity listSequential boundariesSerDesSerial to parallel converterSerial transceiverSet_dont_touchSet_dont_useSet_flattenSet_preferSettling timeSetup and hold checkSetup slackSetup violationShared busSignal assignmentsSignal integritySigned multiplierSilicon complexitySilicon waferSimulationSimulatorSingle portSix input logic functionSkew, slow transitionSlackSLICELSLICEMSOC architectureSOC prototypeSOC speedSoftware and hardware partitioningSpecial low powerSpecificationsSpeech synthesisSpeedSpeed, area and powerSpeed or performance

--- Page 335 ---
Stacked Silicon Interconnects (SSI)Standard cell libraryStandard cellsStar connectivityState machine controllerStatic arbitrationsStatic timing analysisStructured gate arrayStructuringSwitched routing matrixSwitch matrixSymbol_librarySynchronizationSynchronizersSynchronizer, test and debug logicSynchronous and asynchronous resetSynopsys CertifySynopsys_dc.setupSynopsys Design Compiler (SDC)Synopsys Design Compiler (SDC) commandsSynthesisSynthesis optimizationSynthesis toolSynthesis tool directivesSynthesis tweaksSynthesizable constructsSynthesizable modelSystem clock
TTarget libraryTCL commandsTDMTDM and LVDSTechnology libraryTest Access Port (TAP)Test and debug logicTestbenchTest casesTestingTest insertionThroughputTime to marketTimingTiming estimationsTiming optimization, TheTiming pathsTiming performanceTiming reportTiming violationTop-DownTop level boundaryTop level constraints

--- Page 336 ---
Top moduleTransaction level modellingTransactorsTransceiversTransitionTransmission lineTransmitterTri stateTri-state logic
UUngroupUnintentional latches% utilization
VVariable assignmentsVehicle controlsVerificationVerilog or VHDLVideo decodersViolated pathsVirtexVirtex7 7VX200TVirtual clockVoltage and logic levels
WWeak driving strengthWeight factorWorking directoryWrapper file
XXilinxXilinx core generatorsXilinx Vivado
OceanofPDF.com