--- Page 2 ---
 
Swift Programming : A Comprehensive Guide for Developing Fast, Safe,
and Efficient iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS Applications Using the
Swift Language
 
David Matthew
 
Published by CCL Publishing, 2023.

--- Page 3 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 4 ---
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the
publisher assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages
resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
 
SWIFT PROGRAMMING : A COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE FOR
DEVELOPING FAST, SAFE, AND EFFICIENT IOS, MACOS,
WATCHOS, AND TVOS APPLICATIONS USING THE SWIFT
LANGUAGE
 
First edition. July 6, 2023.
 
Copyright © 2023 David Matthew.
 
Written by David Matthew.
 

--- Page 5 ---
Swift
Programming
A Comprehensive Guide for Developing
Fast, Safe, and Efficient iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS
Applications Using the Swift Language
David Matthew
2023

--- Page 6 ---
 
 

--- Page 7 ---
Table of Contents
 
Acknowledgments
How to Use This Book
introduction
Part 1 - Basic Concepts
 
Swift: A Brief History and Overview
Installing Xcode
Exploring the Xcode Interface
Understanding Data Types and Variables
Constants and Variables
Basic Data Types
Type Inference and Type Safety
Operators and Expressions
If, Else, and Else If Statements
Switch Statements
For Loops
While Loops
Control Transfer Statements (break, continue)

--- Page 8 ---
Functions and Closures
Defining Functions
Function Parameters and Return Types
Closures
Higher-Order Functions
Arrays, Sets, and Dictionaries
Arrays
Sets
Dictionaries
Enumerations, Structures, and Classes
Enumerations
Classes
Value Types vs. Reference Types
Properties and Methods
Instance Properties and Methods
Type Properties and Methods
Computed Properties
Property Observers
Inheritance and Polymorphism
Inheritance Basics

--- Page 9 ---
Overriding Methods and Properties
Preventing Overrides
Polymorphism
Protocols and Extensions
Defining Protocols
Conforming to Protocols
Protocol Inheritance
Extensions
Protocol-Oriented Programming
Error Handling
Representing and Throwing Errors
Catching and Propagating Errors
Using Defer for Cleanup Actions
Optionals and Optional Chaining
Forced Unwrapping
Optional Binding
Implicitly Unwrapped Optionals
Optional Chaining
 
Part 2 - Advanced Swift Concepts

--- Page 10 ---
 
Generics
Generic Functions
Generic Types
Extending Generic Types
Type Constraints
Access Control and Code Organization
Custom Types and Extensions
Custom Types
Extensions
Nested Types
Memory Management and ARC
Automatic Reference Counting (ARC)
Strong, Weak, and Unowned References
Strong References
Weak References
Unowned References
Memory Leaks and Cycles
Concurrency and Multithreading
Grand Central Dispatch (GCD)

--- Page 11 ---
Operation Queues
Threads
 
The end

--- Page 12 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 13 ---
 
Acknowledgments
 
 
Iwould like to express my deepest gratitude to all those who have
contributed to the creation of this book, "Swift Programming for Beginners:
A Comprehensive Guide." Without their support, guidance, and expertise,
this work would not have been possible.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my family and friends for their
unwavering encouragement and patience throughout the writing process.
Their belief in me and my abilities has been an invaluable source of
motivation.
I also want to acknowledge the incredible Swift developer community,
whose enthusiasm, passion, and willingness to share their knowledge have
been a constant source of inspiration. The resources, tutorials, and
discussions available online have played an integral role in shaping this
book.
Lastly, I would like to extend my gratitude to Apple Inc. and the team
behind Swift for creating such a powerful, user-friendly, and versatile
programming language. Their commitment to innovation and excellence
has made it possible for developers around the world to build amazing
applications and push the boundaries of what is possible.

--- Page 14 ---
Thank you all for your contributions, support, and encouragement. This
book is a testament to your dedication and passion for the world of Swift
programming.

--- Page 15 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 16 ---
 
How to Use This Book
 
 
"S wift Programming for Beginners: A Comprehensive Guide" is designed
to provide a thorough introduction to the Swift programming language,
along with practical examples and best practices. The book is organized into
five parts, each covering different aspects of Swift programming. Here are
some suggestions on how to get the most out of this book:
 
Start from the beginning: If you're new to programming or Swift, it's
recommended to start from Part I and work your way through the book in a
sequential manner. This will help you build a solid foundation and
gradually progress to more advanced topics.
Use the Table of Contents: If you have some prior programming experience
or are familiar with Swift, feel free to jump to specific chapters or topics
that interest you. The Table of Contents serves as a roadmap, helping you
find the information you need quickly and easily.
Practice as you read: Throughout the book, you'll find code examples and
exercises designed to illustrate concepts and reinforce your understanding.
Make sure to try these out in your own Swift development environment,

--- Page 17 ---
such as Xcode Playgrounds. Hands-on practice is essential for mastering
programming concepts.
Apply the concepts: As you learn new concepts and techniques, think about
how you can apply them in your own projects. This will help solidify your
understanding and enable you to gain practical experience with Swift.
Seek additional resources: While this book aims to be comprehensive,
there's always more to learn. Explore additional resources like Apple's
official documentation, online tutorials, blog posts, and forums to further
expand your knowledge and stay up-to-date with the latest developments in
Swift.
Participate in the Swift community: Engage with other Swift developers by
joining online forums, attending meetups, or participating in open-source
projects. This will not only help you learn from others but also give you an
opportunity to share your knowledge and experiences.
 
Remember, learning to program is a journey, and it requires patience and
persistence. Don't be discouraged by initial setbacks or challenges – keep
practicing, asking questions, and experimenting. With time and dedication,
you'll become proficient in Swift programming and be well on your way to
building amazing applications.
Happy coding!

--- Page 18 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 19 ---
 
introduction
 
 
Swift is a powerful , modern, and versatile programming language
developed by Apple Inc. Introduced in 2014, Swift has quickly become the
preferred language for developing applications on Apple platforms such as
iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS. In addition to its use in Apple's
ecosystem, Swift is also being adopted for server-side development and
other non-Apple platforms, thanks to its open-source nature and growing
community support.
Swift was designed with a focus on simplicity, safety, and performance. It
combines the best features of many programming languages, such as C,
Objective-C, and Python, while also introducing innovative features that
make it more approachable for beginners and highly efficient for
experienced developers.
Key Features of Swift:
 
Readability: Swift has a clean, concise syntax that is easy to read and write,
making it more approachable for beginners and improving code
maintainability.

--- Page 20 ---
Safety: Swift emphasizes safety by incorporating features like strong static
typing, optionals, and error handling, which help prevent common
programming mistakes and make the code more reliable.
Performance: Swift is designed for high performance, with a highly
optimized compiler and language features that enable efficient execution of
code. This allows developers to build fast and responsive applications.
Interoperability: Swift can seamlessly interoperate with Objective-C code
and libraries, making it easier for developers to adopt Swift in their existing
projects and take advantage of its features.
Open-source: Swift is open-source, allowing developers to contribute to its
development, report issues, and access its source code. This has led to a
vibrant and active community that constantly enhances and expands the
language.
Modern language features: Swift includes many modern language features,
such as closures, generics, type inference, and pattern matching, which
allow developers to write expressive, powerful, and reusable code.
Cross-platform compatibility: In addition to Apple platforms, Swift is being
adopted for server-side development through frameworks like Vapor and
Kitura, and on other platforms like Linux and Windows.
 
In this book, you'll learn the fundamentals of Swift programming, starting
with the basics and gradually progressing to more advanced concepts and
techniques. By the end of the book, you'll have a solid understanding of the
Swift language and be well-equipped to develop your own applications for
Apple's platforms and beyond.

--- Page 21 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 22 ---
 
Part 1 - Basic Concepts
 


--- Page 23 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 24 ---
 
Swift: A Brief History and Overview
 
 
Swift was introduced by Apple at the Worldwide Developers Conference
(WWDC) in June 2014. The language was developed as a more modern and
powerful alternative to Objective-C, which had been the primary language
for Apple's platforms since the late 1980s. Chris Lattner, who previously
led the development of the LLVM compiler infrastructure and the Clang
compiler, initiated the development of Swift in 2010, with a team of
engineers at Apple contributing to its design and implementation.
Swift was designed to be easy to read and write, safe, and efficient,
addressing many of the shortcomings of Objective-C. The initial release of
Swift was met with enthusiasm from developers, and the language has seen
rapid adoption and growth in popularity since its launch.
In December 2015, Apple open-sourced Swift under the Apache License
2.0, allowing developers to access its source code, contribute to its
development, and port it to other platforms. This move has helped foster a
vibrant and active community around Swift, resulting in the development of
server-side frameworks and its adoption on non-Apple platforms, like Linux
and Windows.

--- Page 25 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 26 ---
 
Installing Xcode
 
 
Xcode is the official integrated development environment (IDE) for
developing applications on Apple's platforms, including iOS, macOS,
watchOS, and tvOS. Xcode provides a comprehensive suite of tools for
creating, testing, and debugging applications and includes a built-in Swift
compiler, Interface Builder, and SwiftUI previews.
To install Xcode, follow these steps:
 
Check system requirements: Ensure that your Mac is running a compatible
version of macOS. As of Xcode 13, you need macOS Big Sur 11.3 or later.
You can find the specific requirements for the latest version of Xcode on the
App Store or the Apple Developer website.
Download Xcode from the App Store: Open the App Store on your Mac
and search for "Xcode." Locate the Xcode app in the search results and
click on "Get" or "Install" to start the download process. Xcode is a free
download, but you'll need to sign in with your Apple ID to download it.
 

--- Page 27 ---
Alternatively, you can download Xcode directly from the Apple Developer
website (https://developer.apple.com/xcode/). This method requires an
Apple Developer account, which is free to sign up for, and provides access
to additional resources, such as beta versions of Xcode and macOS.
 
Install Xcode: Once the download is complete, the App Store will
automatically install Xcode on your Mac. If you downloaded Xcode from
the Apple Developer website, locate the downloaded .xip file and double-
click it to extract the Xcode app. Then, drag the extracted Xcode app to
your Applications folder.
Launch Xcode: Open the Applications folder on your Mac and double-click
the Xcode app to launch it. The first time you run Xcode, it may take a few
minutes to complete the setup process, which includes installing additional
components and tools.
Sign in with your Apple ID (optional): To access certain features in Xcode,
such as code signing and provisioning for deploying apps to devices, you'll
need to sign in with your Apple ID. This can be done in Xcode by
navigating to Xcode > Preferences > Accounts and clicking the "+" button
to add your Apple ID.
 
Once Xcode is installed and set up, you can start creating new projects,
exploring its features, and writing Swift code using its built-in code editor
and playgrounds.

--- Page 28 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 29 ---
 
Exploring the Xcode Interface
 
 
Xcode is a powerful and feature-rich IDE designed for developing
applications on Apple's platforms. When you first open Xcode, it might
seem overwhelming due to the variety of tools, panels, and options it offers.
However, understanding the key components of the interface will make it
easier to navigate and use Xcode effectively. Here's an overview of the
main areas of the Xcode interface:
 
Welcome Screen: When you launch Xcode, you'll be greeted with the
Welcome screen, which provides quick access to creating new projects,
opening recent projects, and accessing developer resources.
Toolbar: The toolbar at the top of the Xcode window provides easy access
to commonly used actions, such as running and stopping your app, selecting
the active scheme and destination, and accessing debugging tools.
Navigator Area: Located on the left side of the Xcode window, the
Navigator area consists of several navigators that help you organize and
navigate your project's files, resources, and symbols. Some of the most
commonly used navigators are:

--- Page 30 ---
 
Project Navigator: Displays the file structure of your project.
Symbol Navigator: Shows the symbols (classes, methods, etc.) in your
project.
Debug Navigator: Displays information about running processes and
threads during debugging.
Issue Navigator: Lists any issues, such as warnings and errors, found in
your project.
 
Editor Area: The central area of the Xcode window is the Editor area,
where you'll write and edit your code, design user interfaces, and view
documentation. The Editor area can display several different editors, such
as:
 
Source Editor: For editing source code files, such as Swift and Objective-C
files.
Interface Builder: For designing user interfaces using a visual editor with
drag-and-drop functionality.
SwiftUI Preview: For previewing SwiftUI interfaces in real-time as you
make changes to the code.
 
Utility Area: The Utility area, located on the right side of the Xcode
window, provides additional information and tools related to the currently
selected file or object in the Editor area. The Utility area is divided into two
sections:
 

--- Page 31 ---
Inspector Pane: Displays various inspectors that provide context-sensitive
information and options based on the current selection. For example, the
File Inspector shows file properties, and the Attributes Inspector shows
options for configuring user interface elements.
Library Pane: Offers a collection of resources you can add to your project,
such as Interface Builder objects, code snippets, and media files.
 
Debug Area: Located at the bottom of the Xcode window, the Debug area
appears when you run your app in the simulator or on a device. It consists
of two main components:
 
Debug Console: Displays console output, including print statements and
error messages, while your app is running.
Variables View: Shows the values of variables and expressions in the
current scope while debugging.
 
 
By familiarizing yourself with these key components of the Xcode
interface, you'll be well-equipped to start developing applications for
Apple's platforms using Swift. As you work with Xcode, you'll discover
many more tools and features that can help streamline your development
process and improve your productivity.

--- Page 32 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 33 ---
 
Understanding Data Types and Variables
 


--- Page 34 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 35 ---
 
Constants and Variables
 
 
In Swift, you can store and manage data using constants and variables. Both
constants and variables are used to represent values, but they have different
characteristics that determine how they can be used in your code.
Constants: Constants are declared using the let keyword, and their value
cannot be changed once they are assigned. Constants are useful when you
have a value that should remain constant throughout the lifetime of your
program or within a particular scope.
Example of declaring a constant:
 
Variables: Variables are declared using the var keyword, and their value can
be changed during the program execution. Variables are used when the
value associated with a name may change over time or under different
conditions.
Example of declaring a variable:
 

--- Page 36 ---
You can later update the value of a variable:
 
Swift is a type-safe language, which means it enforces strict rules about the
types of values that can be assigned to constants and variables. When you
declare a constant or variable, Swift infers its type based on the initial
value. You can also explicitly specify the type by adding a type annotation
after the name, separated by a colon.
Example of declaring a variable with a type annotation:
 
In this example, the welcomeMessage variable is explicitly declared as a
String type.
It's generally recommended to use constants (let) whenever possible to
improve code safety and readability. Only use variables (var) when the
value needs to change during the program's execution.

--- Page 37 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 38 ---
 
Basic Data Types
 
 
Swift has several basic data types that are commonly used in programming.
Here's an overview of some of the most frequently used data types:
 
Int: This data type represents integer values, which are whole numbers
without any decimal component. Integers can be both positive and negative.
In Swift, the Int type is automatically sized to the platform's native word
size (32-bit on 32-bit platforms and 64-bit on 64-bit platforms).
 
Example:
 
 
Float and Double: These data types represent floating-point numbers, which
are numbers with a decimal component. Float represents single-precision
floating-point numbers, while Double represents double-precision floating-

--- Page 39 ---
point numbers. Double is the default type for floating-point numbers in
Swift and is generally preferred due to its higher precision.
 
Example:
 
 
Bool: This data type represents boolean values, which can be either true or
false. Booleans are often used for conditional expressions and control flow
in your code.
 
Example:
 
 
String: This data type represents a sequence of characters, such as text or
symbols. In Swift, strings are Unicode-compliant and support various
character sets, including emojis.
 
Example:
 
 
Character: This data type represents a single Unicode character. While
similar to strings, characters are used for individual characters rather than
sequences of characters.

--- Page 40 ---
 
Example:
 
Swift also supports more complex data types, such as arrays, dictionaries,
sets, tuples, and custom data structures. These data types allow you to
represent more sophisticated data models and organize your data in various
ways.

--- Page 41 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 42 ---
 
Type Inference and Type Safety
 
 
In Swift, type inference and type safety are essential language features that
improve code readability and help prevent common programming errors.
Type Inference: Type inference is a feature where the Swift compiler
automatically infers the data type of a constant or variable based on its
initial value, eliminating the need for explicit type annotations in many
cases. This makes the code more concise and easier to read.
Example:
 
In these examples, the Swift compiler automatically infers the types of age,
pi, and message as Int, Double, and String, respectively, based on their
initial values.
Type Safety: Swift is a type-safe language, which means the compiler
enforces strict rules about how values of different data types can be used
together in your code. Type safety helps catch potential errors during the

--- Page 43 ---
compilation process, reducing the likelihood of runtime errors and making
your code more reliable.
For example, you cannot perform operations or assign values between
incompatible data types:
 
In this example, trying to add an Int value and a Double value will result in
a compile-time error because the two data types are incompatible. To fix the
error, you need to explicitly convert one of the values to the other's data
type:
 
By combining type inference and type safety, Swift encourages you to write
clear, concise, and reliable code, making it easier to develop and maintain
applications.

--- Page 44 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 45 ---
 
Operators and Expressions
 
 
In Swift, operators and expressions are used to perform various operations
on values and variables, such as arithmetic, comparison, and logical
operations. Here's an overview of some common operators and expressions
in Swift:
 
Arithmetic Operators: These operators perform basic arithmetic operations,
such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
 
Addition (+): Adds two numbers together.
Subtraction (-): Subtracts one number from another.
Multiplication (*): Multiplies two numbers together.
Division (/): Divides one number by another.
 
 

--- Page 46 ---
Example:
 
 
Remainder Operator: The remainder operator (%) calculates the remainder
after dividing one number by another.
 
Example:
 
 
Comparison Operators: These operators compare two values and return a
boolean result (true or false).
 
Equal to (==): Checks if two values are equal.
Not equal to (!=): Checks if two values are not equal.
Greater than (>): Checks if one value is greater than another.
Less than (<): Checks if one value is less than another.
Greater than or equal to (>=): Checks if one value is greater than or equal to
another.
Less than or equal to (<=): Checks if one value is less than or equal to
another.

--- Page 47 ---
 
 
Example:
 
 
Logical Operators: These operators perform logical operations, such as
AND, OR, and NOT, and are often used in conjunction with comparison
operators to create more complex conditions.
 
Logical AND (&&): Returns true if both expressions are true.
Logical OR (||): Returns true if at least one of the expressions is true.
Logical NOT (!): Negates the truth value of an expression.
 
 
Example:
 
 

--- Page 48 ---
Compound Assignment Operators: These operators combine assignment
with another operation, such as addition or subtraction.
 
Add and assign (+=): Adds the right-hand value to the left-hand variable
and assigns the result to the left-hand variable.
Subtract and assign (-=): Subtracts the right-hand value from the left-hand
variable and assigns the result to the left-hand variable.
Multiply and assign (*=): Multiplies the left-hand variable by the right-hand
value and assigns the result to the left-hand variable.
Divide and assign (/=): Divides the left-hand variable by the right-hand
value and assigns the result to the left-hand variable.
 
 
Example:
 


--- Page 49 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 50 ---
 
If, Else, and Else If Statements
 
 
In Swift, the if , else , and else if statements are used to create conditional
branches in your code. These statements allow you to execute different
blocks of code based on specific conditions.
 
If Statement: The if statement is used to execute a block of code only if a
specified condition is true. If the condition is false, the code inside the block
will not be executed.
 
Example:
 
 
Else Statement: The else statement is used in conjunction with an if
statement to execute a block of code when the condition of the if statement

--- Page 51 ---
is false.
 
Example:
 
 
Else If Statement: The else if statement is used to test multiple conditions in
a sequence. It allows you to execute different blocks of code based on the
first true condition encountered in the sequence. If none of the conditions
are true, the block of code following an optional else statement will be
executed.
 
Example:
 
In this example, the first condition (age >= 18) is false, so the program
checks the next condition (age >= 13). Since the second condition is true,
the program prints "You are a teenager!" and does not execute the code
inside the else block.

--- Page 52 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 53 ---
 
Switch Statements
 
 
In Swift, the switch statement is a powerful and flexible control flow
construct used to test multiple conditions and execute different blocks of
code based on the first matching case. Unlike other programming
languages, Swift's switch statement does not require a break statement in
each case, as it does not fall through to the next case by default.
Here's an overview of the switch statement in Swift:
 
Basic Switch Statement:
 
A simple example of a switch statement is matching an integer value:
 

--- Page 54 ---
In this example, the output will be "Three" because the value of number is
3.
 
Switch with Ranges:
 
You can use ranges in a switch statement to match a range of values:
 
In this example, the output will be "It's mild!" because the value of
temperature is 75, which falls within the 60..<80 range.
 
Switch with Tuples:
 

--- Page 55 ---
A switch statement can also match tuples, allowing you to test multiple
values at once:
 
In this example, the output will be "Somewhere else" because the
coordinates tuple does not match any of the specified cases.
 
Switch with Value Binding:
 
You can use value binding in a switch statement to bind temporary
constants or variables to values in a case:
 
In this example, the output will be "Somewhere else at (3, 2)" because the
coordinates tuple does not match any of the other cases, and the temporary
constants x and y are bound to the values in the coordinates tuple.

--- Page 56 ---
 
Switch with where clause:
 
You can use the where keyword to add a condition to a switch case,
allowing you to create more complex matches:
 
In this example, the output will be "Somewhere else" because the
coordinates tuple does not meet any of the where clause conditions.

--- Page 57 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 58 ---
 
For Loops
 
 
In Swift, for loops are used to perform a block of code a specific number of
times or to iterate over a collection, such as an array or a dictionary. There
are two main types of for loops in Swift: for-in loops and for loops using a
range.
 
For-In Loops:
 
A for-in loop is used to iterate over a collection, such as an array, a
dictionary, or a range of numbers. The loop iterates through the items in the
collection and executes the code inside the loop for each item.
Example with an array:
 


--- Page 59 ---
Example with a dictionary:
 
Example with a range:
 
 
For Loops with Ranges:
 
In Swift, traditional C-style for loops have been replaced with more modern
constructs like the for-in loop with ranges. To perform a specific number of
iterations, you can use a range in a for-in loop:
 
In this example, the loop iterates 5 times, with the variable i taking on the
values 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. The range 0..<5 represents all integer values from 0
up to, but not including, 5.
You can also use a stride function to create a range with a custom step
value:
 


--- Page 60 ---
In this example, the loop iterates 5 times, with the variable i taking on the
even values 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8. The stride(from:to:by:) function creates a
sequence of values from 0 up to, but not including, 10, incremented by 2.

--- Page 61 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 62 ---
 
While Loops
 
 
In Swift, while loops are used to repeatedly execute a block of code as long
as a specified condition is true. There are two types of while loops in Swift:
while loops and repeat-while loops.
 
While Loop:
 
A while loop first checks the condition, and if it is true, the code inside the
loop is executed. After each iteration, the condition is checked again, and
the loop continues to execute as long as the condition remains true. If the
condition is initially false, the loop will not execute at all.
Example:
 


--- Page 63 ---
In this example, the loop will execute 5 times, printing the value of count at
each iteration. The loop will stop executing once count is greater than 5.
 
Repeat-While Loop:
 
A repeat-while loop (formerly known as a do-while loop in earlier versions
of Swift) first executes the code inside the loop, and then checks the
condition. If the condition is true, the loop will continue to execute. This
guarantees that the code inside the loop will be executed at least once, even
if the condition is initially false.
Example:
 
In this example, the loop will also execute 5 times, printing the value of
count at each iteration. However, the key difference is that the code inside
the loop is executed before the condition is checked for the first time,
ensuring at least one execution of the loop body.
Both while and repeat-while loops are useful when you don't know the
exact number of iterations needed in advance, as the loop will continue to
execute until the specified condition is no longer true.

--- Page 64 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 65 ---
 
Control Transfer Statements (break, continue)
 
 
In Swift, control transfer statements are used to alter the flow of execution
within loops or switch statements. The two primary control transfer
statements are break and continue .
 
Break:
 
The break statement is used to immediately terminate the execution of a
loop or a switch statement. When a break statement is encountered, the
program jumps out of the current loop or switch statement and continues
executing the code after it.
Example with a loop:
 


--- Page 66 ---
In this example, the loop will terminate when i equals 5, and the numbers 1
through 4 will be printed.
Example with a switch statement:
 
In this example, the break statement is not strictly necessary, as Swift
switch statements do not fall through by default. However, it can be used
for clarity or to terminate a case early in more complex scenarios.
 
Continue:
 
The continue statement is used to skip the remaining code in the current
iteration of a loop and immediately start the next iteration. When a continue
statement is encountered, the program jumps to the next iteration of the
loop without executing any code after the continue statement in the current
iteration.
Example:
 

--- Page 67 ---
In this example, the loop will iterate from 1 to 10, but the print statement
will only be executed for odd numbers. When i is an even number, the
continue statement will be encountered, and the loop will immediately start
the next iteration, skipping the print statement for even numbers.
Both break and continue statements are useful when you need more fine-
grained control over the flow of execution in your loops or switch
statements. They allow you to terminate or skip specific iterations based on
specific conditions.

--- Page 68 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 69 ---
 
Functions and Closures
 


--- Page 70 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 71 ---
 
Defining Functions
 
 
In Swift, functions are self-contained blocks of code that can be called by
their name to perform a specific task. Functions can have parameters, which
allow you to pass values into the function, and they can return a value as a
result of their execution.
Here's a basic overview of how to define and call functions in Swift:
 
Defining a Simple Function:
 
To define a function, use the func keyword, followed by the function name,
a pair of parentheses, and a pair of curly braces containing the function's
code.
 
 

--- Page 72 ---
Calling a Function:
 
To call a function, simply write the function's name followed by a pair of
parentheses.
 
 
Function Parameters:
 
You can define parameters for your function by specifying the parameter
name and its type within the parentheses after the function name.
 
When calling a function with parameters, you need to pass the argument
values in the same order as the parameters are defined.
 
 
Returning Values:
 
Functions can return a value by specifying a return type after the parameter
list, separated by an arrow (->). To return a value from a function, use the
return keyword followed by the value or expression you want to return.
 

--- Page 73 ---
To call a function that returns a value, you can use the function call as an
expression, or assign its result to a variable or constant.
 
 
Default Parameter Values:
 
You can provide a default value for a function parameter by assigning a
value to the parameter using the equal sign (=). If the caller does not
provide an argument for this parameter, the default value will be used.
 
In this example, the salutation parameter has a default value of "Hello". If
no argument is provided for salutation, the default value will be used.
 
Functions are essential building blocks in Swift, allowing you to create
reusable, modular, and readable code.

--- Page 74 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 75 ---
 
Function Parameters and Return Types
 
 
In Swift, functions can have parameters that allow you to pass input values
to the function when it is called. Functions can also have a return type,
which indicates the type of value the function will return upon completion.
Let's explore function parameters and return types in more detail.
 
Function Parameters:
 
To define parameters for a function, specify the parameter name and its type
within the parentheses following the function name. You can define
multiple parameters by separating them with commas.
 
When calling a function with parameters, pass the argument values in the
same order as the parameters are defined, with a colon (:) separating the
parameter name and the value.

--- Page 76 ---
 
 
External Parameter Names:
 
Swift allows you to provide an external parameter name for each parameter
in addition to the local parameter name. This can make function calls more
expressive and self-explanatory. To define an external parameter name,
write it before the local parameter name, separated by a space.
 
When calling a function with external parameter names, use the external
names instead of the local parameter names.
 
 
Return Types:
 
To specify a return type for a function, add an arrow (->) followed by the
type after the parameter list. The function will return a value of the
specified type.
 
When calling a function with a return type, you can use the function call as
an expression or assign its result to a variable or constant.

--- Page 77 ---
 
 
Functions with Multiple Return Values:
 
To return multiple values from a function, you can use a tuple as the return
type. Tuples allow you to group multiple values of different types together.
 
When calling a function that returns a tuple, you can access the individual
values using dot notation and the labels specified in the tuple type.
 
Function parameters and return types are fundamental to writing expressive
and versatile functions in Swift. By using well-defined parameters and
return types, you can create functions that are easy to understand and use,
making your code more maintainable and modular.

--- Page 78 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 79 ---
 
Closures
 
 
Closures are self-contained blocks of functionality in Swift that can be
passed around and used in your code. Closures can capture and store
references to any constants and variables from the context in which they are
defined. In Swift, closures are similar to functions, but they do not have a
name or require a complete function definition.
Closures can be used as function parameters, stored in variables, or returned
from functions. There are three main types of closures in Swift:
 
Global functions: Functions with a name and no capture list.
Nested functions: Functions with a name and a capture list.
Closure expressions: Anonymous functions with no name and a capture list.
 
Closure expressions have a lightweight syntax that allows you to create
closures more concisely. Here's an example of a closure expression:
 

--- Page 80 ---
In this example, the sorted(by:) function takes a closure expression as its
argument, which compares two integers and returns a boolean value
indicating if the first integer should be sorted before the second integer.
Swift provides several optimizations to make closure expressions even
more concise:
 
Inferring Type from Context: Swift can often infer the types of the closure's
parameters and return value from the context in which the closure is used.
 
 
Implicit Return: If the closure expression consists of a single expression,
Swift can automatically infer that it is the return value, so you can omit the
return keyword.
 
let sortedNumbers = numbers.sorted(by: { a, b in a < b })
 
Shorthand Argument Names: Swift provides shorthand argument names for
closure expressions. You can use $0, $1, $2, and so on, to refer to the first,
second, third, and subsequent arguments.
 


--- Page 81 ---
 
Trailing Closure: If the last argument of a function is a closure, you can
write the closure expression after the function call, outside the parentheses.
 
Closures are a powerful feature in Swift, allowing you to create blocks of
code that can be passed around and executed in different parts of your code.
They can help make your code more modular, reusable, and expressive.

--- Page 82 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 83 ---
 
Higher-Order Functions
 
 
Higher-order functions are functions that take other functions as arguments
or return functions as their result. In Swift, higher-order functions are often
used in combination with closures to perform operations on collections such
as arrays or dictionaries. Some common higher-order functions in Swift
include map , filter , and reduce .
 
Map:
 
map is a higher-order function that applies a given transformation function
to each element in a collection and returns a new collection containing the
transformed elements.
Example:
 

--- Page 84 ---
In this example, map is used to square each number in the numbers array
and create a new array containing the squared numbers.
 
Filter:
 
filter is a higher-order function that filters a collection based on a given
condition function. The condition function returns a boolean value, and the
filter function creates a new collection containing only the elements that
satisfy the condition.
Example:
 
In this example, filter is used to create a new array containing only the even
numbers from the numbers array.
 
Reduce:
 
reduce is a higher-order function that combines the elements of a collection
using a given function, resulting in a single value. It takes two arguments:

--- Page 85 ---
an initial value and a function that combines the current result with the next
element in the collection.
Example:
 
In this example, reduce is used to sum all the numbers in the numbers array,
starting with an initial value of 0.
Higher-order functions are a powerful tool in Swift that can make your code
more concise, expressive, and reusable. By using higher-order functions in
combination with closures, you can easily perform complex operations on
collections with just a few lines of code.

--- Page 86 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 87 ---
 
Arrays, Sets, and Dictionaries
 


--- Page 88 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 89 ---
 
Arrays
 
 
In Swift, arrays are ordered collections of values, where each value can be
of any specified type. Arrays use a zero-based index system, meaning that
the first element is at index 0, the second element is at index 1, and so on.
Arrays are flexible and can be resized, but all elements must be of the same
type.
Here are some basic operations and features of arrays in Swift:
 
Creating an Array:
 
You can create an empty array by specifying the type of the elements within
square brackets followed by parentheses.
 
Alternatively, you can create an array with an initial set of elements by
specifying the values within square brackets, separated by commas.

--- Page 90 ---
 
 
Accessing and Modifying Elements:
 
You can access an element in an array by specifying its index within square
brackets. Note that attempting to access an index outside the bounds of the
array will result in a runtime error.
 
To modify an element in an array, assign a new value to the element's index.
 
 
Adding and Removing Elements:
 
You can add an element to the end of an array using the append method.
 
To insert an element at a specific index, use the insert(_:at:) method.
 
To remove an element from an array, use the remove(at:) method.
 


--- Page 91 ---
 
Iterating Over an Array:
 
You can use a for-in loop to iterate over the elements of an array.
 
If you need the index of each element along with its value, use the
enumerated() method.
 
 
Array Properties:
 
Arrays have a count property that returns the number of elements in the
array.
 
You can check if an array is empty using its isEmpty property.
 
Arrays are a fundamental data structure in Swift, allowing you to organize
and manipulate collections of values in an efficient and convenient manner.

--- Page 92 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 93 ---
 
Sets
 
 
In Swift, a set is an unordered collection of unique values. Sets store
distinct values of the same type and do not have a defined order. Sets are
useful when you need to ensure that each value appears only once, or when
you need to perform set-based operations like unions, intersections, or
differences.
Here are some basic operations and features of sets in Swift:
 
Creating a Set:
 
To create an empty set, use the Set initializer with the element type
specified within angle brackets.
 
Alternatively, you can create a set with an initial set of elements by
specifying the values within square brackets, separated by commas.

--- Page 94 ---
 
 
Inserting and Removing Elements:
 
You can add an element to a set using the insert method. If the element is
already present in the set, the method does nothing.
 
To remove an element from a set, use the remove method. If the element is
not present in the set, the method returns nil.
 
 
Checking for Membership:
 
You can check if a set contains an element using the contains method.
 
 
Iterating Over a Set:
 
You can use a for-in loop to iterate over the elements of a set.
 

--- Page 95 ---
 
Set Properties:
 
Sets have a count property that returns the number of elements in the set.
 
You can check if a set is empty using its isEmpty property.
 
 
Set Operations:
 
Swift supports several set operations, such as union, intersection,
difference, and symmetric difference.
 
Union: Combine the elements of two sets.
 
 
Intersection: Find the common elements between two sets.
 


--- Page 96 ---
 
Difference: Remove the elements of one set that are also in another set.
 
 
Symmetric Difference: Find the elements that are either in one set or the
other, but not in both.
 
Sets are a powerful collection type in Swift, providing an efficient way to
store and manipulate unique values. They also support set-based operations
that can be useful for solving various problems that involve relationships
between collections.

--- Page 97 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 98 ---
 
Dictionaries
 
 
In Swift, dictionaries are unordered collections of key-value pairs, where
each key is unique and associated with a value. Dictionaries are useful
when you need to store and access values based on a unique identifier or
key.
Here are some basic operations and features of dictionaries in Swift:
 
Creating a Dictionary:
 
To create an empty dictionary, specify the key and value types within
square brackets, followed by parentheses.
var emptyDictionary: [String: Int] = [:]
Alternatively, you can create a dictionary with an initial set of key-value
pairs by specifying the pairs within square brackets, separated by commas.
Each key-value pair is separated by a colon.
var ages = ["Alice": 30, "Bob": 25, "Charlie": 22]

--- Page 99 ---
 
Accessing and Modifying Values:
 
You can access a value in a dictionary by specifying its key within square
brackets. If the key is not present in the dictionary, the result is nil.
let aliceAge = ages["Alice"]  // aliceAge is 30
To modify a value in a dictionary, assign a new value to the key.
ages["Alice"] = 31  // ages is now ["Alice": 31, "Bob": 25, "Charlie": 22]
To add a new key-value pair to a dictionary, assign a value to a new key.
ages["David"] = 29  // ages is now ["Alice": 31, "Bob": 25, "Charlie": 22,
"David": 29]
To remove a key-value pair from a dictionary, assign nil to the key.
ages["Alice"] = nil  // ages is now ["Bob": 25, "Charlie": 22, "David": 29]
 
Iterating Over a Dictionary:
 
You can use a for-in loop to iterate over the key-value pairs of a dictionary.
for (name, age) in ages {
print("\(name): \(age)")
}
 

--- Page 100 ---
Dictionary Properties:
 
Dictionaries have a count property that returns the number of key-value
pairs in the dictionary.
let numberOfEntries = ages.count  // numberOfEntries is 4
You can check if a dictionary is empty using its isEmpty property.
let isEmpty = ages.isEmpty  // isEmpty is false
 
Accessing Keys and Values:
 
You can access all the keys or all the values of a dictionary using the keys
and values properties, respectively. These properties return collections that
can be converted to arrays.
 
Dictionaries are a versatile collection type in Swift, allowing you to store
and access values based on unique keys. They are useful for tasks such as
organizing data, counting occurrences of items, or storing configuration
options.
Collection Operations
Swift provides a number of powerful operations that you can perform on
collections, including arrays, sets, and dictionaries. These operations allow
you to manipulate, filter, transform, and combine collections in a variety of
ways.

--- Page 101 ---
 
Map:
 
The map operation applies a given transformation function to each element
in a collection and returns a new collection containing the transformed
elements.
 
 
Filter:
 
The filter operation creates a new collection containing only the elements
that satisfy a given condition.
 
 
Reduce:
 
The reduce operation combines the elements of a collection using a given
function, resulting in a single value.

--- Page 102 ---
 
 
Sort:
 
The sort operation sorts the elements of a collection in ascending order.
 
 
FlatMap:
 
The flatMap operation applies a transformation to each element of a
collection and returns a flattened collection of the results.
 
 
Zip:
 

--- Page 103 ---
The zip operation creates a new collection of tuples by combining
corresponding elements from two collections.
 
 
Prefix:
 
The prefix operation returns a new collection containing the first n elements
of the original collection.
 


--- Page 104 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 105 ---
 
Enumerations, Structures, and Classes
 


--- Page 106 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 107 ---
 
Enumerations
 
 
In Swift, an enumeration , or "enum" for short, is a user-defined type that
defines a set of related values. Each value is associated with a unique
identifier or "case". Enums are useful for representing groups of related
values in a type-safe and expressive way.
Here are some basic operations and features of enums in Swift:
 
Defining an Enum:
 
To define an enum, use the enum keyword followed by the enum name and
a list of cases within braces. Each case is separated by a comma.
 
 

--- Page 108 ---
Accessing Enum Cases:
 
You can access an enum case by using dot notation.
 
 
Switching on Enums:
 
You can use a switch statement to match on the value of an enum and
execute a corresponding case.
 
 
Associated Values:
 
Enums can have associated values, which allow you to attach additional
data to each case.
 

--- Page 109 ---
 
Raw Values:
 
Enums can also have raw values, which are values that are pre-assigned to
each case. Raw values can be strings, characters, or any of the integer or
floating-point number types.
 
 
Iterating over Enum Cases:
 
You can create an array of all the cases in an enum by using the
CaseIterable protocol.
 


--- Page 110 ---
Enums are a powerful way to define and manipulate groups of related
values in Swift. They provide a type-safe and expressive way to work with
data, and can help to make your code more readable and maintainable.
Structures
In Swift, a structure, or "struct" for short, is a user-defined type that groups
together related values and behaviors. Structs are useful for organizing and
encapsulating data, and can be used to create complex data types that can be
passed around and manipulated in a type-safe way.
Here are some basic operations and features of structs in Swift:
 
Defining a Struct:
 
To define a struct, use the struct keyword followed by the struct name and a
list of properties within braces.
 
 
Creating an Instance of a Struct:
 
To create an instance of a struct, use the struct name followed by
parentheses, and provide values for each of the properties.
 
 

--- Page 111 ---
Accessing Struct Properties:
 
You can access the properties of a struct by using dot notation.
 
 
Modifying Struct Properties:
 
Because structs are value types in Swift, you can change the value of a
property of a struct by assigning a new value to it.
 
 
Struct Methods:
 
Structs can have methods, which are functions that are associated with the
struct and can operate on its properties.
 


--- Page 112 ---
 
Struct Initialization:
 
Structs can have custom initializers, which are methods that are used to
create and initialize new instances of the struct.
 


--- Page 113 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 114 ---
 
Classes
 
 
In Swift, a class is a reference type that can define properties and methods,
and can be used as a blueprint to create objects. Classes provide a way to
define complex data types that can be used to model real-world objects,
such as a person, a car, or a bank account.
Here are some basic operations and features of classes in Swift:
 
Defining a Class:
 
To define a class, use the class keyword followed by the class name and a
list of properties and methods within braces.
 

--- Page 115 ---
 
Creating an Instance of a Class:
 
To create an instance of a class, use the class name followed by parentheses,
and provide values for each of the properties.
 
 
Accessing Class Properties:
 
You can access the properties of a class instance by using dot notation.
 
 
Modifying Class Properties:
 
Because classes are reference types in Swift, you can change the value of a
property of a class instance by assigning a new value to it.

--- Page 116 ---
 
 
Class Methods:
 
Classes can have methods, which are functions that are associated with the
class and can operate on its properties.
 
 
Class Inheritance:
 
Classes can inherit from other classes, allowing them to reuse code and
customize behavior.

--- Page 117 ---
 
Classes are a powerful way to define and manipulate objects in Swift. They
provide a flexible and reusable way to define complex data types, and can
be used to model real-world objects and relationships.

--- Page 118 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 119 ---
 
Value Types vs. Reference Types
 
 
In Swift, there are two fundamental types: value types and reference types.
Understanding the difference between these two types is important for
writing efficient and safe code.
Value Types:
A value type is a type whose value is copied when it is assigned to a
variable or passed to a function. Examples of value types in Swift include
integers, floating-point numbers, Booleans, and structs.
 
Reference Types:
A reference type is a type whose value is not copied when it is assigned to a
variable or passed to a function. Instead, a reference to the original value is
created. Examples of reference types in Swift include classes and functions.
 

--- Page 120 ---
The main difference between value types and reference types is how they
are copied and assigned. When a value type is assigned to a variable or
passed to a function, a copy of the value is created. When a reference type
is assigned to a variable or passed to a function, a reference to the original
value is created.
It's important to note that while value types are copied when they are
assigned or passed, the underlying memory is not necessarily copied. Swift
uses a technique called copy-on-write (COW) to optimize memory usage
for value types. This means that when a value type is copied, the original
and the copy share the same memory until one of them is modified, at
which point a new copy is created.
In general, it is recommended to use value types whenever possible, as they
are simpler and more predictable than reference types. However, there are
cases where reference types are necessary, such as when modeling complex
relationships between objects.

--- Page 121 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 122 ---
 
Properties and Methods
 
 
 
IN SWIFT, PROPERTIES and methods are used to define the behavior of a
class, struct, or enum. Properties are used to store values, while methods are
used to perform actions and computations.
Properties:
Properties are variables or constants that are associated with a class, struct,
or enum. They are used to store data, and can be accessed and modified
using dot notation.
 

--- Page 123 ---
In this example, the Person class has two properties: name and age. These
properties are initialized in the class's init method, and can be accessed and
modified using dot notation.
Methods:
Methods are functions that are associated with a class, struct, or enum. They
are used to perform actions and computations, and can access and modify
the properties of the associated type.
 
In this example, the Person class has a method called sayHello(). This
method is used to print a greeting to the console, and can access the name
property of the Person instance using dot notation.
Computed Properties:

--- Page 124 ---
Computed properties are properties that are not backed by a stored value,
but instead are computed dynamically based on the values of other
properties. Computed properties are declared using the get and set
keywords, and can be used to provide a convenient interface to complex
computations.
 
In this example, the Circle class has a computed property called diameter.
The get block computes the diameter of the circle based on its radius, while
the set block updates the radius of the circle based on the new diameter. The
computed property can be accessed and modified using dot notation, just
like a regular property.
Properties and methods are essential building blocks of Swift programming.
They are used to define the behavior of classes, structs, and enums, and
provide a powerful and flexible way to manipulate data and perform
computations.

--- Page 125 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 126 ---
 
Instance Properties and Methods
 
 
In Swift, instance properties and methods are properties and methods that
are associated with a specific instance of a class or struct. They are used to
store and manipulate data that is unique to each instance.
Instance Properties:
Instance properties are variables or constants that are associated with a
specific instance of a class or struct. They are used to store data that is
unique to each instance, and can be accessed and modified using dot
notation.
 

--- Page 127 ---
In this example, the Person class has two instance properties: name and age.
Each instance of the class has its own values for these properties, which can
be accessed and modified using dot notation.
Instance Methods:
Instance methods are functions that are associated with a specific instance
of a class or struct. They are used to perform actions and computations that
are specific to each instance, and can access and modify the instance's
properties using dot notation.
 


--- Page 128 ---
In this example, the Person class has an instance method called sayHello().
This method is associated with a specific instance of the class, and can
access the instance's name property using dot notation.

--- Page 129 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 130 ---
 
Type Properties and Methods
 
 
In Swift, type properties and methods are properties and methods that are
associated with the type itself, rather than with an instance of the type. They
are used to define behavior that is common to all instances of the type, and
are accessed using the type name, rather than an instance variable.
Type Properties:
Type properties are properties that are associated with the type itself, rather
than with an instance of the type. They are used to store data that is shared
by all instances of the type, and can be accessed using the type name
followed by the property name.
 


--- Page 131 ---
In this example, the Person class has a type property called count, which is
used to keep track of the number of instances of the class that have been
created. The property is marked as static to indicate that it is associated with
the type itself, rather than with any individual instance of the type.
Type Methods:
Type methods are methods that are associated with the type itself, rather
than with an instance of the type. They are used to perform operations that
are common to all instances of the type, and are accessed using the type
name followed by the method name.
 
In this example, the Math class has a type method called add(_:_:), which
takes two integers as parameters and returns their sum. The method is
marked as static to indicate that it is associated with the type itself, rather
than with any individual instance of the type.
Type properties and methods are a powerful feature of Swift that allow you
to define behavior that is common to all instances of a type, and to access
that behavior using the type name, rather than an instance variable. They
are useful for defining utility functions, keeping track of global state, and
implementing factory methods for creating instances of a type.

--- Page 132 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 133 ---
 
Computed Properties
 
 
In Swift, computed properties are properties that do not store a value
directly, but instead compute their value every time they are accessed. They
are a convenient way to expose properties that are derived from other
properties or that require complex calculations.
Computed properties are declared using the get and set keywords, and can
be used like any other property.
 


--- Page 134 ---
In this example, the Circle struct has a computed property called area. The
get block calculates the area of the circle based on its radius, while the set
block updates the radius of the circle based on a new area. The computed
property can be accessed and modified using dot notation, just like a regular
property.
Computed properties can also be read-only, meaning that they have only a
get block and no set block.
 
In this example, the Square struct has a read-only computed property called
area. The get block calculates the area of the square based on its side length,
but there is no set block, so the property is read-only and cannot be
modified.
Computed properties are a powerful feature of Swift that allow you to
expose properties that are derived from other properties or that require
complex calculations, while still providing a simple and consistent interface
to your data.

--- Page 135 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 136 ---
 
Property Observers
 
 
In Swift, property observers are used to respond to changes in the value of a
property. They are a convenient way to monitor changes to a property and
take action when the value changes.
Property observers are declared using the willSet and didSet keywords, and
can be used to execute code before or after a property's value changes.
 
In this example, the BankAccount class has a property observer on its
balance property. The didSet block is executed every time the value of the
property changes, and prints a message to the console.

--- Page 137 ---
Property observers can also use the willSet keyword to execute code before
the value of a property changes.
 
In this example, the Person class has both a willSet and didSet block on its
age property. The willSet block is executed before the value of the property
changes, and prints a message to the console.
Property observers are a useful feature of Swift that allow you to monitor
changes to a property and take action when the value changes. They are
commonly used in data binding and user interface programming, as well as
in other areas where monitoring changes to a property is important.

--- Page 138 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 139 ---
 
Inheritance and Polymorphism
 
 
In Swift, inheritance is used to create new classes that are based on existing
classes. The new class, known as a subclass, inherits the properties and
methods of the existing class, known as the superclass, and can also add
new properties and methods of its own. Inheritance is a fundamental
building block of object-oriented programming, and allows you to create
complex hierarchies of related classes.
To define a subclass in Swift, you use the class keyword followed by the
subclass name, followed by the superclass name in parentheses.
 

--- Page 140 ---
In this example, the Animal class is the superclass, and the Dog class is the
subclass. The Dog class overrides the makeSound() method of the Animal
class to provide its own implementation of the method. The Dog class
inherits the name property and init method from the Animal class.
Polymorphism is a related concept that refers to the ability of objects of
different classes to be used interchangeably. In Swift, polymorphism is
achieved through inheritance and interfaces, which allow objects of
different classes to be treated as if they were the same type.
 
In this example, the makeAnimalSound() function takes an Animal object
as a parameter, but can also be passed a Dog object, since Dog is a subclass
of Animal. This is an example of polymorphism, since the same function
can be used with objects of different types.

--- Page 141 ---
Inheritance and polymorphism are essential concepts in object-oriented
programming, and are used to create complex hierarchies of related classes
and to build flexible and extensible software systems.

--- Page 142 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 143 ---
 
Inheritance Basics
 


--- Page 144 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 145 ---
 
Overriding Methods and Properties
 
 
In Swift, overriding is the process of providing a new implementation for a
method or property that is already defined in a superclass. Overriding
allows a subclass to provide its own implementation of a method or
property, while still inheriting the functionality of the superclass.
To override a method or property in Swift, you use the override keyword
followed by the method or property you want to override.
 

--- Page 146 ---
In this example, the Dog class overrides the makeSound() method of the
Animal class to provide its own implementation of the method. The
override keyword is used to indicate that the method is being overridden.
Properties can also be overridden in Swift, using the same override
keyword.
 

--- Page 147 ---
In this example, the Bicycle class overrides the numberOfWheels property
of the Vehicle class to provide its own implementation of the property. The
override keyword is used to indicate that the property is being overridden,
and the get and set blocks are used to provide a custom implementation for
the property.
Overriding methods and properties is a powerful feature of Swift that
allows you to customize the behavior of your classes and to provide new
functionality that builds on the functionality of existing classes. However,
care should be taken when overriding methods and properties to ensure that
the behavior of the subclass is consistent with the behavior of the
superclass.

--- Page 148 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 149 ---
 
Preventing Overrides
 
 
In Swift, you can prevent a subclass from overriding a method or property
of a superclass by marking the method or property with the final keyword.
The final keyword indicates that the method or property cannot be
overridden in any subclass.
 
In this example, the makeSound() method of the Animal class is marked
with the final keyword, which prevents any subclass from overriding the
method. The Dog class tries to override the method, but generates a
compiler error because the method is marked as final.
Properties can also be marked as final to prevent them from being
overridden in a subclass.

--- Page 150 ---
 
In this example, the numberOfWheels property of the Vehicle class is
marked as final, which prevents any subclass from overriding the property.
The Bicycle class tries to override the property, but generates a compiler
error because the property is marked as final.
Using the final keyword is a powerful feature of Swift that allows you to
prevent subclasses from overriding methods or properties that you do not
want to be customized or modified. This can help you to ensure the stability
and consistency of your code, and to protect against unexpected changes or
modifications to the behavior of your classes.

--- Page 151 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 152 ---
 
Polymorphism
 
 
Polymorphism is the ability of objects of different classes to be treated as if
they were the same type. In Swift, polymorphism is achieved through
inheritance and interfaces, which allow objects of different classes to be
treated as if they were instances of a common superclass or interface.
Polymorphism allows you to write code that can work with objects of
different types, without needing to know the specific type of each object.
This can help you to write more flexible and extensible code that can be
easily extended or modified in the future.
In Swift, you can use polymorphism to write code that works with objects
of different classes, as long as those classes are related by inheritance.
 

--- Page 153 ---
In this example, the Animal, Dog, and Cat classes are related by
inheritance, with Dog and Cat being subclasses of Animal. The
makeAnimalSound() function takes an Animal object as a parameter, but
can also be passed a Dog or Cat object, since both Dog and Cat are
subclasses of Animal. This is an example of polymorphism, since the same
function can be used with objects of different types.
Polymorphism is a powerful feature of Swift that allows you to write more
flexible and extensible code, and to create complex hierarchies of related
classes. By using inheritance and interfaces to create a common set of
methods and properties that can be shared between different classes, you
can build software systems that are more modular, maintainable, and easy to
understand.

--- Page 154 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 155 ---
 
Protocols and Extensions
 


--- Page 156 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 157 ---
 
Defining Protocols
 
 
In Swift, protocols are used to define a set of methods and properties that
can be adopted by any class, struct, or enum. Protocols define a blueprint
for behavior, but do not provide an implementation of that behavior.
Instead, classes, structs, or enums that adopt a protocol must provide their
own implementation of the methods and properties defined by the protocol.
To define a protocol in Swift, you use the protocol keyword followed by the
name of the protocol and a set of curly braces that define the methods and
properties of the protocol.
 

--- Page 158 ---
In this example, the Animal protocol defines a name property and a
makeSound() method. The Dog class adopts the Animal protocol by
providing its own implementation of the name property and the
makeSound() method. The makeSound() method of the Dog class overrides
the default implementation of the method provided by the Animal protocol.
Protocols can also be used to define optional methods and properties, using
the optional keyword.
 
In this example, the Vehicle protocol defines a numberOfWheels property
and an optional drive() method. The Car class adopts the Vehicle protocol
by providing its own implementation of the numberOfWheels property, but
does not provide an implementation of the drive() method. Since the drive()

--- Page 159 ---
method is marked as optional, it does not need to be implemented by the
Car class.
Protocols are a powerful feature of Swift that allow you to define a set of
methods and properties that can be shared between different classes, structs,
and enums. By defining protocols, you can create a common set of methods
and properties that can be adopted by any class, struct, or enum, making it
easier to share and reuse code between different parts of your program.

--- Page 160 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 161 ---
 
Conforming to Protocols
 
 
In Swift, to conform to a protocol, a class, struct, or enum must provide its
own implementation of all the methods and properties defined by the
protocol. Conforming to a protocol allows instances of a class, struct, or
enum to be treated as instances of the protocol.
To conform to a protocol in Swift, you use the : operator followed by the
name of the protocol.
 


--- Page 162 ---
In this example, the Car class conforms to the Vehicle protocol by providing
its own implementation of the numberOfWheels property and the drive()
method. The numberOfWheels property returns 4, and the drive() method
prints a message to the console.
Conformance to a protocol can also be conditional, using the where
keyword.
 
In this example, the displayVehicleInfo() function takes a generic parameter
T that must conform to the Vehicle protocol and also have a
CustomStringConvertible implementation. The function uses the

--- Page 163 ---
numberOfWheels property and drive() method of the Vehicle protocol to
display information about the vehicle.
The Car and Motorcycle classes conform to the Vehicle protocol by
providing their own implementation of the numberOfWheels property and
the drive() method. The Motorcycle class also has a
CustomStringConvertible implementation that allows it to be displayed as a
string.
Conforming to protocols is a powerful feature of Swift that allows you to
define a common set of methods and properties that can be shared between
different classes, structs, and enums. By conforming to protocols, you can
make your code more flexible and extensible, and create a common
language for communicating between different parts of your program.

--- Page 164 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 165 ---
 
Protocol Inheritance
 
 
In Swift, protocols can inherit from other protocols, allowing you to build a
hierarchy of related protocols that can be adopted by classes, structs, and
enums.
Protocol inheritance allows you to define a common set of methods and
properties in a base protocol, and then extend that protocol with additional
methods and properties in a child protocol. Classes, structs, and enums that
adopt the child protocol automatically adopt all the methods and properties
of the base protocol as well.
To define a protocol that inherits from another protocol in Swift, you use
the : operator followed by the name of the base protocol.
 

--- Page 166 ---
In this example, the Animal protocol defines a name property and a
makeSound() method. The Pet protocol inherits from the Animal protocol
and defines an additional owner property. The Dog class adopts the Pet
protocol by providing its own implementation of the name, owner, and
makeSound() properties and methods.
The Dog class automatically adopts the methods and properties of the
Animal protocol as well, since the Pet protocol inherits from the Animal
protocol. This allows the Dog class to be treated as an instance of both the
Pet and Animal protocols.
Protocol inheritance is a powerful feature of Swift that allows you to define
a hierarchy of related protocols that can be shared between different parts of
your program. By using protocol inheritance to build a common set of
methods and properties that can be inherited by child protocols, you can
make your code more modular, maintainable, and easy to understand.

--- Page 167 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 168 ---
 
Extensions
 
 
In Swift, extensions allow you to add new functionality to an existing class,
struct, or enum, without needing to modify the original implementation of
that type. Extensions can be used to add new methods, computed properties,
and initializers to an existing type, or to provide default implementations of
protocols.
To define an extension in Swift, you use the extension keyword followed by
the name of the type you want to extend. You can then define new methods,
properties, or initializers for that type, or provide default implementations
of protocols.
 
In this example, the Int type is extended to add a new squared() method that
returns the square of the integer. The number variable is an instance of the
Int type, and the squared() method is called on that instance to return the
squared value of number.

--- Page 169 ---
Extensions can also be used to add new computed properties to an existing
type.
 
In this example, the Double type is extended to add new computed
properties for converting distances between kilometers, meters, and
centimeters.
Extensions can also be used to provide default implementations of
protocols.
 
In this example, the Loggable protocol defines a log() method, but does not
provide an implementation for that method. The Loggable protocol is then
extended to provide a default implementation of the log() method. The
MyClass class adopts the Loggable protocol, but does not provide its own
implementation of the log() method. When the log() method is called on an

--- Page 170 ---
instance of the MyClass class, the default implementation provided by the
extension is used.
Extensions are a powerful feature of Swift that allow you to add new
functionality to an existing class, struct, or enum, without needing to
modify the original implementation of that type. By using extensions to add
new methods, properties, or initializers to existing types, or to provide
default implementations of protocols, you can make your code more
flexible, extensible, and easier to maintain.

--- Page 171 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 172 ---
 
Protocol-Oriented Programming
 
 
Protocol-oriented programming (POP) is a programming paradigm in Swift
that emphasizes the use of protocols to define behavior, rather than using
classes and inheritance. In POP, protocols are used to define a set of
methods and properties that can be adopted by any class, struct, or enum,
allowing for more flexible and modular code.
The main principles of protocol-oriented programming in Swift are:
 
Composition over inheritance: In POP, you create types by composing them
from smaller parts using protocols. This approach encourages creating
smaller, more focused protocols that can be combined to create more
complex types.
Protocol extensions: POP makes heavy use of protocol extensions, which
allow you to define default implementations of methods and properties for
any type that adopts a protocol. This approach encourages reuse and
eliminates the need for inheritance chains.
Value types over reference types: In POP, value types (such as structs and
enums) are preferred over reference types (such as classes) because they are

--- Page 173 ---
safer, more predictable, and easier to reason about.
 
Here's an example of how protocol-oriented programming can be used to
create a more modular and flexible architecture for an iOS app:
 
In this example, we define an Animal protocol that defines a set of methods
and properties that can be adopted by any animal type. We then create two

--- Page 174 ---
value types (Dog and Cat) that adopt the Animal protocol and provide their
own implementation of the makeSound() method.
We also define an AnimalProvider protocol that defines a method for
getting a random animal. We then create a RandomAnimalProvider value
type that adopts the AnimalProvider protocol and provides its own
implementation of the getAnimal() method, which returns either a Dog or a
Cat.
Finally, we create an instance of RandomAnimalProvider and use it to get a
random animal. We print the name of the animal and call the makeSound()
method to hear the animal's sound.
In this example, protocol-oriented programming allows us to create a
flexible and modular architecture for our app. By defining protocols for
behavior and using value types instead of classes, we create code that is
easier to understand, maintain, and extend.

--- Page 175 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 176 ---
 
Error Handling
 


--- Page 177 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 178 ---
 
Representing and Throwing Errors
 
 
 
IN SWIFT, ERRORS ARE represented by types that conform to the Error
protocol. You can define your own custom error types by defining a struct
or enum that conforms to the Error protocol.
Here's an example of how to define a custom error type:
 
In this example, we define a custom error type FileError that can represent
two different types of errors: fileNotFound and invalidData. The FileError
type conforms to the Error protocol, which allows it to be thrown and
caught like any other error in Swift.
To throw an error in Swift, you use the throw keyword followed by an
instance of an error type. For example:

--- Page 179 ---
 
In this example, we define a function readFile() that throws an error of type
FileError if the file cannot be found. We use a guard statement to check if
the fileURL variable is not nil, and if it is, we throw a
FileError.fileNotFound error.
To catch an error in Swift, you use a do-catch statement. For example:
 
In this example, we use a do-catch statement to attempt to call the
readFile() function. If an error is thrown, the appropriate catch block is
executed based on the type of error. If an unknown error is thrown, the
catch-all catch block at the end is executed.
Error handling in Swift allows you to write more robust and reliable code
by handling unexpected situations and errors gracefully. By defining your
own custom error types and using the throw and do-catch statements, you
can create code that is more flexible and easier to maintain.

--- Page 180 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 181 ---
 
Catching and Propagating Errors
 
 
 
IN SWIFT, YOU CAN CATCH errors using the do-catch statement, and
propagate errors up the call stack using the throws keyword.
When a function can throw an error, you mark it with the throws keyword
in its signature. This informs callers of the function that they need to handle
any errors that may be thrown by the function. If a function does not throw
any errors, you can omit the throws keyword from its signature.
Here's an example of a function that can throw an error:
 


--- Page 182 ---
In this example, we define a function divide(_:_:) that divides dividend by
divisor. If divisor is zero, the function throws a MathError.divideByZero
error. The throws keyword in the function signature indicates that this
function can throw an error.
To call this function, you use a do-catch statement to catch any errors that
may be thrown:
 
In this example, we attempt to call the divide(_:_:) function with dividend
set to 10 and divisor set to 2. Since this call can throw an error, we wrap it
in a do-catch statement to handle any errors that may be thrown. If the call
to divide(_:_:) succeeds, the result variable contains the result of the
division. If an error is thrown, the appropriate catch block is executed.
You can also propagate errors up the call stack using the throws keyword in
the function signature. When a function marked with throws calls another
function that can throw an error, it must either handle the error or propagate
it up the call stack by rethrowing the error.
Here's an example of how to propagate an error up the call stack:
 


--- Page 183 ---
In this example, the doDivision() function attempts to call the divide(_:_:)
function with dividend set to 10 and divisor set to 0. Since the divide(_:_:)
function can throw a MathError.divideByZero error, the doDivision()
function must either handle this error or propagate it up the call stack by
rethrowing it.
In this case, the doDivision() function propagates the error up the call stack
by throwing it again. The catch block in the outer do-catch statement
catches the error and prints a message indicating that a divide by zero error
occurred.

--- Page 184 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 185 ---
 
Using Defer for Cleanup Actions
 
 
In Swift, you can use the defer keyword to execute code that must be run
regardless of whether an error is thrown or not. defer is often used for
cleanup actions that need to be performed, such as releasing resources or
closing files.
The defer statement allows you to specify a block of code that is guaranteed
to be executed just before the current scope is exited, regardless of how the
scope is exited. This means that if an error is thrown or if a return statement
is encountered, the defer block will still be executed before the function
returns.
Here's an example of how to use defer to close a file:
 

--- Page 186 ---
In this example, we define a function processFile(atPath:) that opens a file
for reading and reads data from it. We use a guard statement to check if the
file handle is not nil, and if it is, we throw a FileError.fileNotFound error.
We also use a defer statement to close the file handle, regardless of whether
an error is thrown or not. The defer block is executed just before the
function returns, which ensures that the file handle is always closed, even if
an error occurs.
Here's another example that demonstrates how to use defer to release a
resource:
 


--- Page 187 ---
In this example, we define a class Resource that represents some kind of
resource that needs to be released when it is no longer needed. We use a
defer statement to call the release() method just before the
processResource() function returns, which ensures that the resource is
always released, regardless of how the function is exited.
Using defer in Swift allows you to write code that is more robust and
reliable by ensuring that cleanup actions are always performed, even in the
presence of errors or unexpected situations. By using defer, you can avoid
memory leaks, resource leaks, and other problems that can occur if cleanup
actions are not performed properly.

--- Page 188 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 189 ---
 
Optionals and Optional Chaining
 
 
Optionals are an important feature in Swift that allow you to represent
values that may or may not be present. In Swift, an optional value is
represented by wrapping the underlying value in an Optional type, which is
denoted by a question mark ( ? ) after the type.
Here's an example of how to declare an optional variable:
 
In this example, we declare an optional variable optionalValue that may or
may not contain a string value. The ? after the String type indicates that this
variable is optional.
To safely access the underlying value of an optional, you can use optional
chaining. Optional chaining allows you to chain together multiple optional
values and access their underlying values safely, even if one or more of the
optional values is nil.
Here's an example of how to use optional chaining to safely access an
optional value:

--- Page 190 ---
 
In this example, we use the optional chaining operator (?) to access the
count property of the optionalValue variable. If optionalValue is not nil, its
count property is accessed and its value is assigned to the length constant. If
optionalValue is nil, the else block is executed instead.
Optional chaining can also be used with method calls and subscript access:
 
In this example, we define a class Person that has an optional name
property and a non-optional age property. We use optional chaining to call
the sayHello() method on an optional person instance. If person is not nil,
its sayHello() method is called. If person is nil, the method call is skipped.
We also use optional chaining to access the count property of the optional
name property. If name is not nil, its count property is accessed and its

--- Page 191 ---
value is returned. If name is nil, the entire expression evaluates to nil.
Using optionals and optional chaining in Swift allows you to write code that
is more robust and less error-prone by gracefully handling situations where
values may or may not be present. By using optionals and optional
chaining, you can avoid runtime errors and crashes that can occur if you
assume that values are always present when they may not be.

--- Page 192 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 193 ---
 
Forced Unwrapping
 
 
Forced unwrapping is a feature in Swift that allows you to explicitly
unwrap an optional value, i.e., to extract the underlying value from an
optional. Forced unwrapping is denoted by placing an exclamation mark ( !
) after the optional value.
Here's an example of how to force unwrap an optional:
 
In this example, we declare an optional variable optionalValue that may or
may not contain a string value. We then force unwrap the value of
optionalValue and assign it to the constant unwrappedValue. If
optionalValue is nil, an error is thrown at runtime.
While forced unwrapping can be useful in certain situations, it is generally
considered unsafe and should be used with caution. Forced unwrapping
should only be used when you are absolutely certain that the optional value
is not nil, and when you are willing to accept the risk of a runtime error if
the value is unexpectedly nil.

--- Page 194 ---
To avoid the risks of forced unwrapping, it's usually better to use optional
binding or optional chaining to safely access the underlying value of an
optional. Optional binding allows you to safely extract the underlying value
of an optional and assign it to a non-optional variable, while optional
chaining allows you to safely access the underlying value of an optional
without unwrapping it.
Here's an example of how to use optional binding to safely extract the
underlying value of an optional:
 
In this example, we use an if let statement to safely extract the underlying
value of optionalValue. If optionalValue is not nil, its underlying value is
assigned to the constant unwrappedValue and the if block is executed. If
optionalValue is nil, the else block is executed instead.
By using optional binding or optional chaining instead of forced
unwrapping, you can write code that is more robust and less error-prone,
and that gracefully handles situations where optional values may or may not
be present.

--- Page 195 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 196 ---
 
Optional Binding
 
 
Optional binding is a feature in Swift that allows you to safely extract the
underlying value of an optional and assign it to a non-optional variable.
Optional binding is denoted by using the if let or guard let statement.
Here's an example of how to use if let to safely extract the underlying value
of an optional:
 
In this example, we declare an optional variable optionalValue that may or
may not contain a string value. We then use an if let statement to safely
extract the underlying value of optionalValue and assign it to the constant
unwrappedValue. If optionalValue is nil, the else block is executed instead.
The if let statement checks whether optionalValue contains a value, and if it
does, it unwraps the value and assigns it to the constant unwrappedValue. If
optionalValue is nil, the if statement fails and the else block is executed.

--- Page 197 ---
You can also use guard let to safely extract the underlying value of an
optional:
 
In this example, we define a function processOptionalValue() that uses
guard let to safely extract the underlying value of optionalValue. If
optionalValue is nil, the guard statement fails and the else block is executed,
which prints a message and returns from the function. If optionalValue
contains a value, the guard statement succeeds and the if block is executed,
which prints the value of optionalValue.
By using if let or guard let to safely extract the underlying value of an
optional, you can avoid the risks of forced unwrapping and write code that
is more robust and less error-prone. Optional binding allows you to
gracefully handle situations where optional values may or may not be
present, and ensures that your code is safe and predictable.

--- Page 198 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 199 ---
 
Implicitly Unwrapped Optionals
 
 
In Swift, an implicitly unwrapped optional is a type of optional that is
automatically unwrapped when it is accessed, without the need for explicit
unwrapping. Implicitly unwrapped optionals are declared by using the
exclamation mark ( ! ) after the type name.
Here's an example of how to declare an implicitly unwrapped optional:
 
In this example, we declare an implicitly unwrapped optional
implicitlyUnwrappedOptional that may or may not contain a string value.
Because this variable is an implicitly unwrapped optional, we can access its
underlying value without using optional binding or forced unwrapping.
When we access the count property of implicitlyUnwrappedOptional, Swift
automatically unwraps the underlying value of the optional and returns the
length of the string.
Implicitly unwrapped optionals are useful in situations where you know that
an optional value will always have a non-nil value after it is first set, but

--- Page 200 ---
you don't want to use optional binding or forced unwrapping every time you
access its underlying value.
Here's an example of how to use an implicitly unwrapped optional in a
function:
 
 
 
IN THIS EXAMPLE, WE define a function greet() that takes an implicitly
unwrapped optional parameter who. Because who is an implicitly
unwrapped optional, we can pass in a string value without explicitly
unwrapping it.
When we call greet() with a string value, Swift automatically unwraps the
underlying value of who and passes it to the function. We can also use
forced unwrapping (who!) to explicitly unwrap the underlying value of
who, if needed.
While implicitly unwrapped optionals can be useful in certain situations,
they should be used with caution, because they can still cause runtime
errors if their underlying value unexpectedly becomes nil. In general, it's
usually better to use regular optionals, optional binding, or optional
chaining, unless you have a good reason to use an implicitly unwrapped
optional.

--- Page 201 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 202 ---
 
Optional Chaining
 
 
Optional chaining is a feature in Swift that allows you to safely access the
underlying value of an optional without unwrapping it. Optional chaining is
denoted by using the question mark ( ? ) after an optional value.
Here's an example of how to use optional chaining to safely access the
underlying value of an optional:
 


--- Page 203 ---
In this example, we define a class Person that has an optional name
property and a non-optional age property. We then create an optional person
instance and assign it a value.
We use optional chaining to access the count property of the optional name
property of person. If person or person.name is nil, the entire expression
evaluates to nil. If person and person.name both contain non-nil values, the
expression evaluates to the length of the name string.
We then use optional binding to safely extract the underlying value of
nameLength and print the length of the person's name if it is not nil.
By using optional chaining instead of forced unwrapping, you can write
code that is more robust and less error-prone, and that gracefully handles
situations where optional values may or may not be present. Optional
chaining allows you to safely access the underlying value of an optional
without unwrapping it, and ensures that your code is safe and predictable,
even in cases where the underlying value may be nil.

--- Page 204 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 205 ---
 
Part 2 - Advanced Swift Concepts
 


--- Page 206 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 207 ---
 
Generics
 
 
Generics is a feature in Swift that allows you to write flexible, reusable
functions and types that can work with any data type. Generics are denoted
by using angle brackets ( <> ) and a placeholder name for the generic type
parameter.
Here's an example of a generic function that takes an array of any type and
returns the first element:
 
In this example, we define a generic function firstElement that takes an
array of any type T, and returns an optional value of type T. We use the first

--- Page 208 ---
property of the array to return the first element of the array, or nil if the
array is empty.
We then call the firstElement function with an array of strings and an array
of numbers, and use optional binding to safely extract the underlying value
of the optional return value.
By using generics, we can write a single function that can work with any
type of array, without having to write a separate function for each type.
Generics can also be used to define generic types, such as generic classes,
structs, and enums. Here's an example of a generic class that can work with
any type:
 
In this example, we define a generic class Stack that can work with any type
T. The class has three methods push, pop, and peek that modify or access

--- Page 209 ---
the stack, as well as a count property that returns the number of elements in
the stack.
We then create a new instance of the Stack class that can only work with
integers by specifying the type parameter as Int. We push three integers
onto the stack, and then pop and print each element until the stack is empty.
By using generics to define the Stack class, we can create a stack that can
work with any type of element, without having to define a separate stack
class for each type.

--- Page 210 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 211 ---
 
Generic Functions
 
 
Generic functions are functions that can work with any data type, using a
placeholder type parameter. Generic functions are denoted by using angle
brackets ( <> ) and a placeholder name for the generic type parameter.
Here's an example of a generic function that takes two arguments of any
type, and swaps their values:
 
In this example, we define a generic function swapValues that takes two
arguments a and b of any type T, and swaps their values. We use the inout
keyword to indicate that the arguments are passed by reference.

--- Page 212 ---
We then call the swapValues function with two integers, and use the &
symbol to pass their references to the function. The function swaps the
values of the two integers, and when we print their values, we can see that
they have been swapped.
By using a generic type parameter, we can write a single function that can
work with any data type, without having to write a separate function for
each type.
Generic functions can also be used with constraints, which limit the types of
data that can be used with the function. For example, you might want to
write a function that only works with data types that conform to a certain
protocol, or that have a specific property or method.
Here's an example of a generic function that takes an array of any data type
that conforms to the Comparable protocol, and returns the maximum value
in the array:
 
In this example, we define a generic function findMax that takes an array of
any data type T that conforms to the Comparable protocol, and returns the
maximum value in the array. We use the max method of the array to return
the maximum value.
We then call the findMax function with an array of integers and an array of
strings, and use optional binding to safely extract the maximum value from
the return value.

--- Page 213 ---
By using a generic type parameter with a constraint, we can write a function
that can work with any data type that conforms to a certain protocol or has a
certain property or method.

--- Page 214 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 215 ---
 
Generic Types
 
 
Generic types are types , such as classes, structs, and enums, that can work
with any data type, using a placeholder type parameter. Generic types are
denoted by using angle brackets ( <> ) and a placeholder name for the
generic type parameter.
Here's an example of a generic class Stack that can work with any data
type:
 

--- Page 216 ---
In this example, we define a generic class Stack that can work with any data
type T. The class has three methods push, pop, and peek that modify or
access the stack, as well as a count property that returns the number of
elements in the stack.
We then create a new instance of the Stack class that can only work with
strings by specifying the type parameter as String. We push three strings
onto the stack, and then pop and print each element until the stack is empty.
By using a generic type parameter, we can create a single class that can
work with any data type, without having to define a separate class for each
type.
Generic types can also be used with constraints, which limit the types of
data that can be used with the type. For example, you might want to define
a generic type that only works with data types that conform to a certain
protocol, or that have a specific property or method.

--- Page 217 ---
Here's an example of a generic struct Point that can work with any data type
T that conforms to the Numeric protocol:
 
In this example, we define a generic struct Point that can work with any
data type T that conforms to the Numeric protocol. The struct has two
properties x and y of type T, as well as an initializer and a custom +
operator that can be used to add two points together.
We then create two instances of the Point struct that use integers as the
generic type parameter, and use the + operator to add them together. We
print the resulting point, which has its x and y values added together.
By using a generic type parameter with a constraint, we can define a type
that can work with any data type that conforms to a certain protocol or has a
certain property or method.

--- Page 218 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 219 ---
 
Extending Generic Types
 
 
You can extend generic types, such as classes, structs, and enums, just like
you can extend non-generic types. When you extend a generic type, the
extension applies to all instances of the type, regardless of the type
parameter used.
Here's an example of extending the Stack class from the previous example
with a new method that returns the top two elements of the stack:
 


--- Page 220 ---
In this example, we define an extension of the generic Stack class that adds
a new method topTwo, which returns a tuple containing the top two
elements of the stack. If there are less than two elements in the stack, the
second element of the tuple is set to nil.
We then create a new instance of the Stack class that can only work with
integers, and push three integers onto the stack. We use the topTwo method
to extract the top two elements of the stack, and print them.
By extending a generic type, we can add new functionality to the type
without having to modify the original implementation. This can be useful
when you want to add new methods or properties to a type that you don't
own, such as a built-in type or a third-party library.
Extensions can also be used with constraints, which limit the types of data
that can be used with the extension. For example, you might want to extend
a generic type with a new method that only works with data types that
conform to a certain protocol, or that have a specific property or method.
Here's an example of extending the Point struct from the previous example
with a new method that returns the distance between two points:
 
In this example, we define an extension of the generic Point struct that adds
a new method distance, which returns the distance between two points. The
extension uses a constraint that limits the extension to only work with
points that use data types that conform to the FloatingPoint protocol.

--- Page 221 ---
We then create two instances of the Point struct that use double precision
floating point numbers as the generic type parameter, and use the distance
method to calculate the distance between them. We print the resulting
distance between the two points.

--- Page 222 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 223 ---
 
Type Constraints
 
 
Type constraints are used to limit the types of data that can be used with a
generic type or function. You can use type constraints to ensure that a
generic type or function only works with certain types that meet certain
requirements, such as conforming to a certain protocol or having a certain
property or method.
Here's an example of using type constraints with a generic function sum
that adds two values together, but only works with values that conform to
the Numeric protocol:
 
In this example, we define a generic function sum that takes two arguments
a and b of any type T that conforms to the Numeric protocol, and returns

--- Page 224 ---
their sum. We use the + operator of the Numeric protocol to add the two
values together.
We then call the sum function with two integers, and use the resulting sum
in a print statement.
By using a type constraint, we can limit the types of data that can be used
with the sum function, and ensure that the function only works with data
types that have the required properties or methods.
Type constraints can also be used with generic types, such as classes,
structs, and enums. For example, you might want to define a generic type
that only works with data types that conform to a certain protocol, or that
have a certain property or method.
Here's an example of defining a generic class Queue that can work with any
data type that conforms to the Equatable protocol:
 


--- Page 225 ---
In this example, we define a generic class Queue that can work with any
data type T that conforms to the Equatable protocol. The class has three
methods enqueue, dequeue, and contains that modify or access the queue,
as well as a count property that returns the number of elements in the queue.
We then create a new instance of the Queue class that can only work with
strings by specifying the type parameter as String. We enqueue three strings
onto the queue, and then use the contains method to check if the queue
contains a certain string. We print the resulting Boolean value, which is true
if the queue contains the string and false otherwise.

--- Page 226 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 227 ---
 
Access Control and Code Organization
 
 
Access control and code organization are important concepts in Swift that
help you structure and organize your code, as well as control access to the
various parts of your code.
Access control refers to the ability to control the visibility and accessibility
of the various parts of your code. Swift provides several access control
levels that you can use to control access to your code:
 
private: The private access level limits the use of an entity to its containing
file.
fileprivate: The fileprivate access level limits the use of an entity to its
defining file.
internal: The internal access level limits the use of an entity to its defining
module.
public: The public access level allows the use of an entity from any module,
but only allows access to its public interface.

--- Page 228 ---
open: The open access level allows the use of an entity from any module,
and allows access to its public and internal interface, as well as allowing
subclassing and overriding.
 
 
OU CAN APPLY ACCESS levels to classes, structures, enums, protocols,
properties, methods, functions, and even to extensions. By using access
levels, you can control the visibility of your code and prevent unwanted
access or modification.
Here's an example of using access levels to restrict the visibility of a
property:
 
In this example, we define a class MyClass with a private property
myPrivateProperty and a public property myPublicProperty. We also define
a method doSomething that can access both properties.
We then create an instance of MyClass and use the myPublicProperty
property to set its value. However, we cannot access the myPrivateProperty
property from outside the class, as it is marked as private.

--- Page 229 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 230 ---
 
Custom Types and Extensions
 
 
 
CUSTOM TYPES AND EXTENSIONS are important concepts in Swift
that allow you to define and extend your own data types.

--- Page 231 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 232 ---
 
Custom Types
 
 
In Swift, you can define your own custom types using struct , class , and
enum . These types can have properties, methods, and subscripts just like
the built-in types. You can also use inheritance to create subclasses of
classes.
Here's an example of defining a custom type Person as a struct:
 
In this example, we define a Person struct with three properties: name, age,
and isStudent. We also define a sayHello method that prints a greeting
message with the person's name and age.

--- Page 233 ---
We then create an instance of Person named person1, set its properties, and
call the sayHello method.

--- Page 234 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 235 ---
 
Extensions
 
 
Extensions are a way to add new functionality to an existing type, such as a
class, struct, or enum. You can add new properties, methods, and subscripts
to a type, or even conform it to a protocol.
Here's an example of adding a new method sayGoodbye to the Person struct
using an extension:
 
In this example, we define an extension for the Person struct that adds a
new method sayGoodbye. We can now call this method on any instance of
Person, including person1.

--- Page 236 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 237 ---
 
Nested Types
 
 
Nested types in Swift are types that are defined within the scope of another
type, such as a class, struct, or enum. You can use nested types to group
related functionality together and encapsulate it within a single type.
Here's an example of defining a nested type Card within a Deck struct:
 


--- Page 238 ---
In this example, we define a Deck struct that contains an array of Card
objects. We also define a Card struct within the Deck struct that contains
properties for the card's value and suit.
We then define two methods for the Deck struct: shuffle, which shuffles the
deck of cards, and drawCard, which returns the top card from the deck.
By defining the Card struct within the Deck struct, we can encapsulate the
functionality for a single card within the larger context of the deck. This
makes it easier to reason about the code and reduces the chances of naming
conflicts.
You can also nest enums and classes within other types, and even nest
multiple levels of nested types within a single type.

--- Page 239 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 240 ---
 
Memory Management and ARC
 
 
Memory management is an important concept in programming that refers to
how your program allocates and releases memory for objects and variables.
In Swift, memory management is handled automatically using a technology
called Automatic Reference Counting (ARC).

--- Page 241 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 242 ---
 
Automatic Reference Counting (ARC)
 
 
Automatic Reference Counting (ARC) is a memory management
technology used by Swift to automatically manage the allocation and
deallocation of memory for objects. ARC automatically tracks the number
of references to an object and automatically deallocates the object when
there are no more references to it.
In Swift, whenever an object is created, its memory is automatically
allocated and a reference count of one is assigned to it. Every time a new
reference to the object is created, such as by assigning the object to a new
variable or passing it as an argument to a function, the reference count is
incremented. When a reference to the object is destroyed, such as when a
variable holding the reference goes out of scope or when a function returns,
the reference count is decremented. When the reference count reaches zero,
the object is deallocated and its memory is released.
Here's an example of how ARC works:
 

--- Page 243 ---
In this example, we create three variables person1, person2, and person3, all
of which refer to the same Person object. As each variable is assigned to the
object, its reference count is incremented. When the variables are set to nil,
the reference count is decremented, and when the reference count reaches
zero, the Person object is deallocated.
ARC is a powerful technology that simplifies memory management in
Swift, making it easier for developers to write safe and efficient code.
However, it's important to understand how ARC works to avoid common
issues such as memory leaks and retain cycles.

--- Page 244 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 245 ---
 
Strong, Weak, and Unowned References
 
 
In Swift, there are three types of reference you can use to create
relationships between objects: strong, weak, and unowned references. These
references determine how objects are retained and released in memory.

--- Page 246 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 247 ---
 
Strong References
 
 
By default, Swift uses strong references when you create a new object or
assign it to a variable. A strong reference means that the object is strongly
owned by the variable, and the reference count is incremented each time a
new strong reference is created. The object is deallocated when all strong
references are destroyed.
 


--- Page 248 ---
In this example, we create two strong references person1 and person2 to the
Person object. When person2 is assigned to person1, the reference count is
incremented to 2. When both variables are set to nil, the reference count is
decremented to 0 and the object is deallocated.

--- Page 249 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 250 ---
 
Weak References
 
 
Aweak reference is a type of reference that does not increase the reference
count of an object. Instead, it is used to create a temporary relationship
between two objects where one object may be deallocated while the other
still exists. A weak reference must be declared as an optional, because it is
possible for the referenced object to be deallocated at any time.
 

--- Page 251 ---
In this example, we create two Person objects and assign a weak reference
from person1 to person2. When person2 is set to nil, its reference count is
decremented to 0 and the object is deallocated. When person1 is set to nil,
its reference count is also decremented to 0 and the object is deallocated.

--- Page 252 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 253 ---
 
Unowned References
 
 
An unowned reference is a type of reference that does not increase the
reference count of an object. It is similar to a weak reference, but it assumes
that the referenced object will always exist, so it doesn't need to be optional.
If the referenced object is deallocated, an unowned reference will cause a
runtime error.
Here's an example of using unowned references in Swift:
 

--- Page 254 ---
In this example, we create two Person objects and assign an unowned
reference from person1 to person2. The bestFriend property of person1 is
declared as an implicitly unwrapped optional, which means that it is
assumed to always have a value and does not need to be unwrapped. When
person2 is set to nil, its reference count is decremented to 0 and the object is
deallocated. When person1 is set to nil, its reference count is also
decremented to 0 and the object is deallocated.

--- Page 255 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 256 ---
 
Memory Leaks and Cycles
 
 
 
A MEMORY LEAK IS A situation where memory is allocated for an object
but never released, resulting in the memory being consumed by the program
and eventually leading to memory exhaustion. Memory leaks can occur in
any programming language, including Swift.
One common cause of memory leaks in Swift is retain cycles. A retain
cycle occurs when two objects have strong references to each other,
creating a circular reference that prevents either object from being
deallocated.
A memory leak is a situation where memory is allocated for an object but
never released, resulting in the memory being consumed by the program
and eventually leading to memory exhaustion. Memory leaks can occur in
any programming language, including Swift.
One common cause of memory leaks in Swift is retain cycles. A retain
cycle occurs when two objects have strong references to each other,

--- Page 257 ---
creating a circular reference that prevents either object from being
deallocated.
Here's an example of a retain cycle in Swift:
 
In this example, we create two Person objects and assign a strong reference
from person1 to person2 and vice versa. This creates a retain cycle, because
each object has a strong reference to the other. When both variables are set
to nil, the reference count is decremented to 1, because each object has a
strong reference to itself through its bestFriend property.
To avoid memory leaks and retain cycles, you can use weak or unowned
references instead of strong references, or you can break the cycle by
breaking one of the strong references. For example, you can set the
bestFriend property to nil when an object is deallocated:
 

--- Page 258 ---
In this modified example, we use a weak reference for the bestFriend
property, which allows the objects to reference each other without creating a
retain cycle. When an object is deallocated, its bestFriend property is set to
nil, which breaks the cycle and allows the object to be deallocated.

--- Page 259 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 260 ---
 
Concurrency and Multithreading
 
 
Concurrency and multithreading are important concepts in programming
that allow for multiple tasks to be executed simultaneously, or at least
appear to be executed simultaneously. In Swift, there are several ways to
achieve concurrency and multithreading, including using Grand Central
Dispatch (GCD), operation queues, and threads.

--- Page 261 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 262 ---
 
Grand Central Dispatch (GCD)
 
 
Grand Central Dispatch is a technology built into macOS and iOS that
provides a way to manage concurrent tasks. GCD allows you to schedule
tasks to run on a global queue or a private queue, with the option of
specifying the priority of the task.
Here's an example of using GCD in Swift:
 
In this example, we use DispatchQueue to schedule a task to run on a
background thread with a user-initiated quality of service (QoS). We then
use DispatchQueue.main.async to update the user interface on the main
thread, which is required because UI updates must be performed on the
main thread.

--- Page 263 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 264 ---
 
Operation Queues
 
 
Operation queues are another way to manage concurrent tasks in Swift. An
operation queue manages a queue of Operation objects, which can be added
to the queue and executed concurrently. Operations can be dependent on
other operations, and the operation queue can manage the dependencies and
ensure that operations are executed in the correct order.
Here's an example of using operation queues in Swift:
 
In this example, we create an OperationQueue and two BlockOperation
objects. We add the second operation as a dependency of the first operation,
which ensures that the second operation does not start until the first

--- Page 265 ---
operation is complete. We then add both operations to the queue, which will
execute them concurrently.

--- Page 266 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 267 ---
 
Threads
 
 
Finally, it's possible to use threads to achieve concurrency in Swift. A
thread is a lightweight process that runs concurrently with other threads in
the same process. In Swift, you can create a new thread by subclassing
Thread and overriding the main method.
Here's an example of using threads in Swift:
 
In this example, we create a new MyThread object and start the thread by
calling its start method. The main method of the thread is executed
concurrently with other threads in the same process.

--- Page 268 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 269 ---
 
The end
 
 
Congratulations, you have reached the end of this book ! We hope that this
book has provided you with a solid foundation in the basics of Swift
programming and has given you an understanding of some of the more
advanced concepts as well.
Remember that programming is a skill that requires practice and persistence
to master. Don't be afraid to experiment and try new things, and always be
willing to learn from your mistakes.
If you want to continue learning more about Swift or programming in
general, there are many resources available to you, including online
courses, books, and community forums. You can also explore the Apple
developer website for more information about Swift and iOS development.
Thank you for reading this book, and we wish you the best of luck on your
programming journey!
 


--- Page 270 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 271 ---
Don't miss out!
 
Click the button below and you can sign up to receive emails whenever
David Matthew publishes a new book. There's no charge and no obligation.
 
https://books2read.com/r/B-I-SNIZ-BYILC
 
https://books2read.com/r/B-I-SNIZ-BYILC
 
 
Connecting independent readers to independent writers.

--- Page 272 ---
OceanofPDF.com