--- Page 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
Mastering
Flutter
Learn to develop Flutter apps for
iOS,
Android, desktop and web
Kevin Moore
www.bpbonline.com

--- Page 4 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 5 ---
First Edition 2025
Copyright © BPB Publications, India
ISBN: 978-93-65899-177
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any
form or by any means or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission
of the publisher with the exception to the program listings which may be entered, stored and executed
in a computer system, but they can not be reproduced by the means of publication, photocopy,
recording, or by any electronic and mechanical means.
LIMITS OF LIABILITY AND DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY
The information contained in this book is true to correct and the best of author’s and publisher’s
knowledge. The author has made every effort to ensure the accuracy of these publications, but
publisher cannot be held responsible for any loss or damage arising from any information in this
book.
All trademarks referred to in the book are acknowledged as properties of their respective owners but
BPB Publications cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
www.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 6 ---
Dedicated to
My wife, two sons and two cats
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
About the Author
Kevin Moore is currently working as a Flutter developer for two
companies and has been an Android developer for over 14 years and a
Flutter developer for over 4 years. He has written several books on mobile
development, including Android, Flutter, and Kotlin Multi-platform. He is a
Google Developer Expert in Flutter and speaks at conferences around the
country.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
About the Reviewers
❖ Randal Schwartz is a self-taught programmer, writer, trainer, and new
media host with a passion for technology and creative pursuits.
Throughout his career, Randal has honed his skills in various
programming languages, including Perl, Dart, and Flutter, and has
become a recognized expert in the field. Notably, he has authored
several influential books on Perl programming, including
"Programming Perl," "Learning Perl," and "Effective Perl
Programming.”
He is currently recognized as a Google Developer Expert in the areas of
Dart and Flutter (one of 10 in the United States and 150 in the world).
Randal's professional journey has taken him through diverse roles, from
software developer and system administrator to consultant and technical
writer. He has contributed his expertise to numerous organizations,
including Stonehenge Consulting Services, Inc., O'Reilly & Associates,
and TWiT.tv, where he hosted the popular show "FLOSS Weekly."
Beyond his technical prowess, Randal is also a gifted communicator and
educator. He has lectured at conferences, provided technical training,
and shared his insights through magazine articles and online platforms.
Randal's unique blend of technical expertise, writing talent, and
engaging personality has made him a sought-after speaker, author, and
consultant in the tech industry.
❖ Roman Jaquez is a Google Developer Expert in Flutter as well as a
Google Certified Cloud Architect who loves sharing his passion for
Flutter with the wider developer community. He is also the lead
organizer at GDG Lawrence and has 10+ years of experience as a
software engineer. He enjoys spreading the word about best practices in
the industry, ranging from mobile, web, and cloud.

--- Page 9 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 10 ---
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my gratitude to all those who contributed to the
completion of this book.
First and foremost, I extend my heartfelt appreciation to my family and
friends for their unwavering support and encouragement throughout this
journey. Their love and encouragement have been a constant source of
motivation.
I would like to extend a special thanks to the following individuals for their
valuable input and contributions to this project: Simon Lightfoot, Randal
Schwartz, Roman Jaquez, and Scott Stoll. Thank you for your invaluable
support and all the things you have taught me.
I would also like to thank Yiru Gan for the incredible design on the Movie
App.
I am immensely grateful to BPB Publications for their guidance and
expertise in bringing this book to fruition. Their support and assistance were
invaluable in navigating the complexities of the publishing process.
Last but not least, I want to express our gratitude to the readers who have
shown interest in the book. Your support and encouragement have been
deeply appreciated.
Thank you to everyone who has played a part in making this book a reality.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 11 ---
Preface
Flutter has become one of the most popular multi-platform frameworks
available. While others have died out, Flutter continues to grow stronger
and have a larger community. It has done so because it is easy to use and
easy to create apps for every major platform. Instead of learning each
platform and language, you can just learn one.
Comprising nineteen chapters, this book covers a wide range of topics
essential for learning Flutter. From the Dart programming language needed
to write Flutter apps, to the widget system provided by Flutter you will
learn everything you need to start creating apps for every platform.
Chapter 1: Introduction to Flutter - Learn all about Flutter and why you
should use it. Learn how to install Flutter and get started. You will also
choose which IDE you will use to develop apps. You will learn about the
Flutter architecture and the basics of how it is put together.
Chapter 2: Dart Essentials - Learn about the Dart programming language
that is used to write Flutter apps. Dart is a modern programming language
with a lot of great features. You will need to know this language if you are
to write Flutter apps. You will learn about basic programming fundamentals
like variables, control flow, functions, and classes, as well as some more
advanced topics like null safety.
Chapter 3: Building the Movie App - Learn about the app you will build
with this book. This is a beautiful app that showcases popular movies and
allows users to learn all about the movie and the cast. You will start the app
from scratch, learning how to create your own apps. You will also learn
about the different types of widgets Flutter uses. Finally, you will learn
about the amazing hot reload feature of Flutter that allows you to keep
changing your app while it is running and not have to rebuild each time.

--- Page 12 ---
Chapter 4: Basic Widgets - Get started with learning some of the most
important widgets that Flutter offers. Mastering these building block
widgets will help you build screens.
Chapter 5: Themes, Colors and Fonts - An app is boring and ugly unless
you have a good set of consistent colors and fonts. Learn how to create a
theme that has the colors and fonts you need to build the movie app.
Chapter 6: State Management Fundamentals - How you manage the
state of your data will either make your programming life difficult or easy.
Learn some of the state management packages available to Flutter
developers.
Chapter 7: Advanced Widgets - Now that you know the basic widgets,
learn more advanced widgets like ListViews, Grids, Cards, and Slivers.
Chapter 8: Navigation and Routing - Learn an easy way to transition
from one page to another. Learn how to push and pop pages with ease.
Chapter 9: Animations and Transitions - Let your app look professional
with engaging animations.
Chapter 10: Futures and Async/Await - Prevent your UI from slowing
down by performing background tasks asynchronously. Learn all about
Dart’s Futures.
Chapter 11: Networking - Learn how to retrieve data from the cloud. This
is really important as there is a lot of great information out there to show
your users.
Chapter 12: Local Storage and Databases - Learn how to save data for
both simple and complex data needs. Learn about shared preferences for
simple data and databases for more complex needs.
Chapter 13: Web and Desktop - Now that you have created mobile apps,
learn how to develop for the desktop (both the Mac and Windows) and the
web.
Chapter 14: Handling User Input and Gestures - Learn how to handle
input from the user, from text fields, and gestures to focus management.
Chapter 15: Firebase - Learn how to use one of the most popular cloud
databases to store your data remotely.

--- Page 13 ---
Chapter 16: Packages - Learn how to create your own Dart package. This
is really useful to create shared code, either for yourself, your team, or
others in the community.
Chapter 17: Platform Channels and Plugins - Learn about how you can
write code that runs natively on each platform. This is useful if you cannot
find a plugin that does what you need. You will build a plugin to save and
retrieve native preferences.
Chapter 18: Testing and Performance - Learn about the different types of
testing, from unit to widget and then to integration. This will allow you to
feel confident in your code and will show you any problems that may crop
up when you are changing your code. You will also learn about the tools
available to measure your app’s performance and find and fix those
problems.
Chapter 19: Building and Publishing - In this final chapter you will learn
how to build release versions of your app and publish them to both the
Google Play Store and the Apple App Store. This will allow you to reach
your users on both platforms.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 14 ---
Code Bundle and Coloured Images
Please follow the link to download the
Code Bundle and the Coloured Images of the book:
https://rebrand.ly/d0ff3b
The code bundle for the book is also hosted on GitHub at
https://github.com/bpbpublications/Mastering-Flutter. In case there’s an
update to the code, it will be updated on the existing GitHub repository.
We have code bundles from our rich catalogue of books and videos
available at https://github.com/bpbpublications. Check them out!
Errata
We take immense pride in our work at BPB Publications and follow best
practices to ensure the accuracy of our content to provide with an indulging
reading experience to our subscribers. Our readers are our mirrors, and we
use their inputs to reflect and improve upon human errors, if any, that may
have occurred during the publishing processes involved. To let us maintain
the quality and help us reach out to any readers who might be having
difficulties due to any unforeseen errors, please write to us at :
errata@bpbonline.com
Your support, suggestions and feedbacks are highly appreciated by the BPB
Publications’ Family.
Did you know that BPB offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.bpbonline.com and as a print book
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at :
business@bpbonline.com for more details.
At www.bpbonline.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on BPB books and eBooks.

--- Page 15 ---
Piracy
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would be
grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at
business@bpbonline.com with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author
If there is a topic that you have expertise in, and you are interested in either writing or
contributing to a book, please visit www.bpbonline.com. We have worked with thousands of
developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their insights with the global
tech community. You can make a general application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are
recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.
Reviews
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not leave a review on the site
that you purchased it from? Potential readers can then see and use your unbiased opinion to make
purchase decisions. We at BPB can understand what you think about our products, and our
authors can see your feedback on their book. Thank you!
For more information about BPB, please visit www.bpbonline.com.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book’s Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 16 ---
Table of Contents
1. Introduction to Flutter
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Overview of Flutter
History
Flutter architecture
Benefits of Flutter
Flutter’s language: Dart
Installing Flutter SDK
Windows
macOS
CocoaPods
Flutter Doctor
Development application
Conclusion
2. Dart Essentials
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Variables
Built-in types
Null safety

--- Page 17 ---
Control flow
Branches
If
Switch
Loops
Functions
Main function
Anonymous functions
Comments
Single line comments
Multi-line comments
Documentation comments
Imports
Classes
Constructors
Mixins
Enums
Extensions
Concurrency
Async/Await
Streams
Exceptions
Conclusion
3. Building the Movie App
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Creating the movie app
Visual Studio Code

--- Page 18 ---
Android Studio
Widgets
Stateless and stateful widgets
Hot reload and debugging
Movie app UI
Movie architecture
Clean architecture
SOLID
Folder structure
First steps of the Movie app
Conclusion
4. Basic Widgets
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Flutter project structure
pubspec.yaml
Pubspec fields
Lints
lib folder
Folders
Scaffold, AppBar, and NavigationBar
Widgets
Scaffold
AppBar
BottomNavigationBar
Drawer
Snackbar
Containers, rows, and columns

--- Page 19 ---
Container
Column
Rows
Text, images, and icons
Text
Images
Icons
Buttons and more
Buttons
Selection
Chips
DatePicker
PopupMenuButton
Radio button
Slider
Switch
TimePicker
Text input
Build movie app screens
Movie row
Conclusion
5. Themes, Colors and Fonts
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Colors
Typography
Material Design
Google Fonts

--- Page 20 ---
Themes
Fully customized theme
ColorScheme
Material Theme Builder
Light vs dark
Creating a theme
iOS
Xcode
Conclusion
6. State Management Fundamentals
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Understanding state in Flutter
Local versus app state
Built-in State
InheritedWidget
State management with packages
Provider
BloC
GetIt
Redux
MobX
Immutable state
Riverpod
Genre screen
Genre section
Sorting
Movie list

--- Page 21 ---
Conclusion
7. Advanced Widgets
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
ListView
Expanded
Stack
IndexedStack
LayoutBuilder
GridView
Table
Card
BottomSheets
Slivers
Movie trailers
Conclusion
8. Navigation and Routing
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Navigator widget
Navigator
Router
RouterDelegate
RouterInformationParser
RouteInformationProvider
MaterialApp

--- Page 22 ---
Named routes
Deep linking
Custom schemes
Android deep links
Verifying a domain
Testing Android
iOS deep links
iOS custom scheme
iOS verification
Bottom navigation
GoRouter and AutoRoute
GoRouter
AutoRoute
Connecting the movie app
DeepLink testing
Android
iOS
Conclusion
9. Animations and Transitions
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Basic animation concepts
Implicit animations
Tween animations
Advanced animation techniques
Explicit animations
AnimationController
Animation
Curves

--- Page 23 ---
AnimatedBuilder
Staggered animations
Animation widgets
Hero animations
Custom animations
Animation libraries and tools
Animation packages
Movie app
Flutter animate
Custom routes
Conclusion
10. Futures and Async/Await
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Concurrency in Flutter
Futures
Async/await
Event loop
FutureBuilder
Streams
StreamBuilder
Isolates
Conclusion
11. Networking
Introduction
Structure
Objectives

--- Page 24 ---
Networking
TMDB
JSON and serialization
Data models
Networking packages
Dio package
API Security
Trending movies
Logging
ViewModel
Fixing errors
Movie details
Trailers and cast
Home screen image
Final APIs
Genres
Conclusion
12. Local Storage and Databases
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
SharedPreferences
Saving genres
Databases
SQLite
Floor
Hive
Isar
Drift

--- Page 25 ---
Movie configuration
Images
Database models
Movie view model
Cleanup
Conclusion
13. Web and Desktop
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
MacOS
Menus
Platforms
DesktopWindow
AdaptiveScaffold
AdaptiveLayout
Search dialog
Windows
Web
Firebase Hosting
Conclusion
14. Handling User Input and Gestures
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
User input and event handling
GestureDetector
Focus management

--- Page 26 ---
Text
Ink widgets
InkResponse
KeyboardListener
Repositories
Sources
Repository
MovieViewModel
Movie listing
Conclusion
15. Firebase
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Introduction to Firebase
Setting up Firebase
Authentication
Cloud Firestore
Collections
Reading and writing data
Firebase database
Firebase provider
Crashlytics
Other services
Conclusion
16. Packages
Introduction
Structure

--- Page 27 ---
Objectives
Introduction to packages
Creating a package
Movie data project
Example app
Refactoring code to package
Movies project
Publishing a package
pubspec.yaml
Readme.md
Changelog.md
License file
Requirements
Verified publisher
Publishing
Conclusion
17. Platform Channels and Plugins
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Writing a plugin
Using third-party plugins
Platform channels
Building a plugin
Creating the plugin
Building the plugin
Android plugin
Plugin files
Example plugin app

--- Page 28 ---
iOS plugin
Movies app
Conclusion
18. Testing and Performance
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Testing
Unit testing
Movie plugin unit test
Groups
Widget testing
First widget test
Integration testing
Performance
Widget tree
DevTools
Conclusion
19. Building and Publishing
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Google developer account
Apple developer account
Icons
Android icons
iOS icons
Android release

--- Page 29 ---
App store
iOS release build
Play Store
Conclusion
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 30 ---
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Flutter
Introduction
In this chapter, you will take your first steps towards mastering Flutter,
Google's UI toolkit for crafting beautiful, natively compiled applications for
mobile, web, and desktop from a single codebase. You will learn about and
install Flutter. You will also learn about the Movie application that you will
be creating in this book.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Overview of Flutter
• Flutter architecture
• Benefits of Flutter
• Flutter’s language: Dart
• Installing Flutter SDK
• Development application
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have an understanding of what Flutter is
and the incredible possibilities it unlocks. You will be eager to dive into the
next chapters and embark on your journey to become a Flutter master!

--- Page 31 ---
Overview of Flutter
Flutter is a UI toolkit developed by Google. It has the ability to run on
mobile (both Android and iOS), desktop (macOS, Windows, and Linux), and
the web. The Flutter toolkit uses a declarative UI built of Widgets. In fact,
Google likes to say that everything is a widget. There are widgets for almost
every task you need, and if not, you just need to create your own, by
building a widget with other widgets inside or going all the way and creating
a custom widget with its own rendering code. You will learn more in later
chapters.
As mentioned above, Flutter works on almost every platform using almost
the same code (some separate code needs to be written for platform-specific
areas like menus). In fact, Google used Flutter on their Nest displays.
History
Flutter has an interesting history; the first version was introduced in 2015
and was known as Sky. It ran on Android. It used Dart as the development
language. Then in 2018 Flutter 1.0 was released. In 2021, Flutter 2 was
released at the Flutter Engage event. This version had a canvas-based engine
for the web and early desktop support. This was a very important version as
it introduced Dart 2.0 with null safety. This made development safer (but
broke existing code). In 2021, Flutter 2.5 was released with Material Design
support. In 2022 Flutter 3 was introduced with full desktop support and iOS
Objective-C and Swift interop.
There have been many attempts at cross-platform frameworks, many of
which have failed. Java was supposed to be the one language to rule them all
but never quite achieved it. Since then, there have been other attempts such
as React Native (by Facebook) and Xamarin (by Microsoft). React Native is
still in use but Microsoft has ended support for Xamarin and now uses .Net
MAUI. React Native uses HTML web pages and Xamarin uses C#.
Flutter architecture
The Flutter framework is made up of several layers. Each layer can be
replaced if needed but does not have any special access to the layer below it.

--- Page 32 ---
The top-level layer is the Framework. This is written in Dart. The entire
Flutter framework looks like the following figure:
Figure 1.1: Flutter architecture
This layer contains the widgets you will be using/creating. The Framework
layer contains many different common widgets that you will use as well as
the rendering code needed to display those widgets. The Material and
Cupertino libraries are for Google and Apple’s UI look and feel. The

--- Page 33 ---
Rendering, Animation, Painting, and Foundation are lower-level Dart codes
that form the essential drawing framework.
The next layer is the Engine and is written in C/C++. This is not a layer you
need to use. The final layer is the Embedder and is different for each
platform. One of the nice features of Flutter is that each application is
compiled into native code just like any other application on that platform.
This means that applications run as fast as native applications (or faster).
Note: That there is a small overhead for the built-in Flutter code.
For the engine, Flutter was originally built using the Skia graphics drawing
system. The Flutter team is moving this system to a newer version called
Impeller. It has been written for both iOS and Android and will be coming
to other platforms later.
If you do not find the functionality you need in the Flutter framework, you
can use many third-party plugins and packages. Packages are code written in
Dart that provide extra functionality. Plugins are built with lower-level code
for each platform. For example, a plugin would need separate code for
Android, iOS, macOS, Windows, and the web.
Benefits of Flutter
One of the main benefits of Flutter is its rapid development time. This
happens in several different areas. The first one is the declarative UI that
Flutter uses, which allows you to use widgets that contain other widgets and
only update those that have changed. The killer feature of Flutter is its hot
reload feature. This allows you to start the application on the platform you
are working on and make almost any change. Click the Hot reload button,
and your application will be updated. You can add new packages, add new
screens, change your logic, and just have the application instantly update.
Adding a new plugin will have you restart your program, but you can
normally do most of your application development in one session.
Unlike many other cross-platform systems, Flutter has native performance as
it is compiled into native code.
Flutter is also open source, so it can be examined and even improved. The
entire source code is available to see how everything works.

--- Page 34 ---
More importantly, Flutter can build for any platform. This makes
development faster as you only have one code base. It also reduces the
number of engineers needed on a project. Flutter can also be developed for
the web (although that is still a work in progress).
For the web, you can output your application using HTML, a canvas-based
system, or WebAssembly (Wasm). The canvas-based system is faster but
makes it so that systems like Google search cannot index your web pages.
This is bad for search engine optimization (SEO). This means Google will
not be able to find and index individual pages. This problem is currently
being worked on.
Flutter’s language: Dart
Flutter uses the Dart language which was developed by Google. Since it was
originally developed for the web, it is similar to JavaScript. The syntax is
very similar with variables being defined with the var keyword and both
having async/await keywords. Google has made a lot of improvements to the
language, especially the 2.0 version with null safety. Null safety solves many
inadvertent crashes. The language is object-oriented, uses classes, and is
garbage-collected (which just means that it handles all allocation/disposal of
classes in memory). The language was released in 2013 and Flutter 2.0 was
released in 2018. They then introduced the dart2native tool to create native
code. This means that you do not have to have the Dart SDK installed on a
machine to run applications (unlike Java, which needs a JDK or JRE to run).
Dart 3.0 was released in May 2023 with null safety, records, patterns, and
class modifiers. There is also work being done for Wasm, but it is not
finished yet. Wasm is a binary instruction format designed to run code at
near-native speed in web browsers, complementing JavaScript. It enables
developers to compile high-performance applications written in various
languages (like C++, Rust, or Go) and run them efficiently on the web,
expanding the possibilities for web applications beyond what JavaScript
alone could traditionally handle.
Flutter is a single-threaded toolkit with a main thread. Dart provides a way to
create asynchronous methods using the async and await keywords. This is
for running methods in a semi-asynchronous way (they are put in a queue to
be run on the main thread). To get true multi-threading, you need to use
Dart’s isolates. This is the way to truly run things on another thread. They

--- Page 35 ---
are called isolates because they are totally isolated from any other thread.
You cannot share variables or anything in memory. You can pass data back
and forth with send and receive ports, which are part of the Dart language.
Isolates are pretty advanced. There are a few methods that will allow you to
write simple isolates but to pass data back and forth is difficult.
Installing Flutter SDK
To get started with Flutter you will want to download the Flutter SDK.
1. Go to https://docs.flutter.dev/get-started/install and follow the
instructions for the desktop platform you are on.
2. Find the Install the Flutter SDK section of the instructions and
download the zip.
3. Unzip the files and put them in an easy-to-find location on your
computer. Make sure the path is simple and does not contain any spaces
or special characters. A good example is flutter. Next, you will need to
add the flutter installation to your path.
Windows
For Windows, go to Advanced System Settings | Advanced | Environment
Variables. In the User variables section edit the Path entry. Double-click
on an empty row and type the path to Flutter. For example: C:\flutter.
Click on the OK buttons until you are out of all dialogs.
macOS
For macOS, you will need to update your path by opening or creating a file
called ~/.zshenv. Add the following line:
export PATH=$HOME/flutter/bin:$PATH
When you have installed Flutter in a folder called flutter you can save
the file.
CocoaPods
iOS and MacOS applications usually use CocoaPods for library management
(although that is changing). This tool is used for managing iOS and MacOS

--- Page 36 ---
libraries. For Flutter you will need this tool as it generates a library needed
to run Flutter on these platforms. CocoaPods is located at:
https://cocoapods.org/. There are two ways to install it. Since the Mac has
several tools already installed (ruby and gems), you can simply install it
from the command line with this line (you will need your
password for this):
sudo gem install cocopods
Another alternative is the Homebrew package manager. This is a very
popular package manager that allows you to easily install other command
line programs. This makes it very simple to install command line software
on a Mac. You can find this at: https://brew.sh/. After installing it, use this:
brew install cocopods
Flutter Doctor
A really good tool to use is Flutter itself. There are several flutter tools
available. The most important one is Flutter doctor. This tool does a
diagnostic on Flutter and will let you know if you need to install any
additional tools or fix a problem. From a command line type:
flutter doctor
You should see something like this (refer to the following figure):
Figure 1.2: Flutter doctor
If there are any errors, follow the directions for fixing them.
Development application

--- Page 37 ---
When developing a Flutter application, you can use any text editor you want,
but if you want to be more productive, you can use an integrated
development environment (IDE). It will help you organize your code and
make it easy to run and test. There are several IDEs that can run Flutter
applications.
The first one is called Visual Studio Code from Microsoft. This is a free
IDE that is very lightweight. It has extensions for Flutter development. It has
become very popular. The next two are from Google and JetBrains.
JetBrains is the maker of many different IDEs. Google has written one
called Android Studio based on JetBrain’s framework. The other is called
Intellij from JetBrains. This is not specific to Android and can be used for
Java/Kotlin development as well as Flutter. In this book, we will be using
Android Studio (all these IDEs are free, and there is a free and paid version
of Intellij).
1. To install Android Studio, go to https://developer.android.com/studio.
2. Download the latest stable version. As of this writing that was Android
Studio Ladybug (animal names are given for each version). Follow the
instructions on the website for installing Android Studio.
3. Once installed, start the application. The first time you run the
application you will be prompted to download the Android SDK. Follow
those instructions.
For mobile devices you will need to install an emulator for Android and on
macOS you will need a simulator for iOS.
For iOS, you will need to install Xcode. Follow the given steps:
1. Open tahe App Store and search for Xcode. Download and install it, as
shown in the following figure:

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 1.3: App Store
2. Next, you will run the xcode-select command to set the directory for
other tools to find Xcode tools. This tool will set the directory for where
to find Xcode tools. The runFirstLaunch command will allow you to
accept Apple terms and conditions and install any missing components.
From a command line (open the Terminal application) type:
sudo sh -c ‘xcode-select -s 
/Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer && xcodebuild -
runFirstLaunch’
3. Next, open XCode and from the Window menu choose Devices and
Simulators, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 1.4: Xcode devices menu
4. Next, choose the Simulators button, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 40 ---
Figure 1.5: Xcode devices
5. Then click the plus button at the bottom left; type in a name for your
simulator and choose the Device Type and OS Version you want. Then
click Create, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 1.6: Create new simulator

--- Page 41 ---
You should see your new simulator in the list, on the left. You will be able to
use this simulator when you test your application on iOS. You can make as
many different types of simulators as you need.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have learned about Flutter, its architecture, and why you
would want to use it. You have also installed the Flutter SDK with all its
needed tools, as well as an IDE. You now have an overview of the
application you will be reading about, in this book.
In the next chapter, you will learn more about the Dart language.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 42 ---
CHAPTER 2
Dart Essentials
Introduction
Before you begin writing Flutter applications, it is important that you
understand the language that is used to build them. This language is Dart.
Dart was created by Google and was originally intended just for the web. It
has evolved over the years. The language is constantly improving and new
innovative features are coming soon. It is now at version 3.x, with each
major version adding features that either other languages have, or new
features that extend the language.
If you are familiar with other programming languages, then most of Dart
will be familiar to you. However, there are some unique language features
that make Dart stand out. Dart is an object-oriented language that also has
garbage collection. What this means is that you do not have to worry (as
much) about cleaning up memory (There are some classes that you will
need to dispose of when finished). Although Dart is a single-inheritance
language (meaning a class can only directly subclass one parent), it can
achieve a form of multiple inheritance through the use of mixins. The
following sections will cover the basics of the Dart language.
Note: This chapter is not meant to be an exhaustive, detailed description of Dart but to give
you enough information to write your Flutter applications (that would require a whole book).
Structure

--- Page 43 ---
This chapter covers the following topics:
• Variables
• Control flow
• Functions
• Comments
• Imports
• Classes
• Enums
• Extensions
• Concurrency
• Exceptions
Objectives
At the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding of Dart and
will be able to use it to build Flutter applications. You will learn about
variables for storing values, control flow for executing functions, and
functions for building smaller executable code segments. Object-oriented
programming with classes and enums and more advanced topics.
Additionally, you will learn how to run code in the background and how to
handle exceptions.
Variables
One of the most important aspects of any language is the ability to store
data in memory. This is done through variables. Dart is a type of safe
language. It ensures that the variables match the type they are defined as. In
Dart, you can declare a variable with the var keyword. This means the data
stored in the variable can change, but it does not specify the type of data the
variable holds. When you assign a value to a var variable it will then have
that type. To do that you would declare it with a type. Dart provides some
built-in types.
Built-in types

--- Page 44 ---
Dart has types that are similar to other languages. These are:
• Numbers: int and double. Integers are whole numbers while doubles
have fractional values
• Strings: Defined with single or double quotes
• Booleans: Bool—true or false
• Sets: Unique list of items
• List: List of one type
• Maps: Key/value pairs
• Null: An empty value
• Object: Top-level class that all classes subclass
• Enum: Enumeration of specific values
• Iterable: Used in for loops—an interface for classes that can retrieve
each value
• Never: For functions that always throw an exception
• Dynamic: Usually used for JSON parsing—can be any value
• Void: The value is never used—used as a return type
Number variables store integers and double values. Strings are typically
defined with single quotes but can also use double quotes, (you will get a
lint error if you use double quotes as it is recommended that you use
single). Booleans are crucial for controlling the flow of your program, while
sets and maps are excellent for storing collections of items. The null value
is used to indicate that a variable does not currently hold a valid value. The
Object class is the root of the Dart class hierarchy. All classes implicitly
inherit from Object if no other superclass is specified. Enums are used to
define a type with a fixed set of possible values. The Iterable interface is
implemented by collections like lists, which provide methods for iterating
their elements. Many classes implement the Iterable interface, making them
useful in for loops.
The Never type is less common; it indicates that an expression will never
complete, typically because it throws an exception. You will probably never
use it. It indicates that an expression will never finish, usually when it will
be throwing an exception. The dynamic type is often used in JSON parsing
when the exact types of the data are unknown. It allows you to check the

--- Page 45 ---
type at runtime before using the values. The void type is used as the return
type of a function to indicate that the function does not return a value.
Dart also has some more unique types:
• Records: Create lightweight anonymous classes without defining them.
• Runes: An integer representing a Unicode code point of a string.
Records allow you to create immutable objects on the fly, combining
multiple values. They are useful for functions that return multiple results.
Records are a newer part of Dart. You can create a record variable in several
ways. The first and most simple is to surround a set of values in parentheses
like:
var myData = (first:’Fred’, last: ‘Smith’);
This creates a myData record with two fields: first and last. You can
also return a record from a function. This allows you to return multiple
values. For example:
(bool, String) processString(String name) {
  return (true, name);
}
If you want to return a result and the value of the function, records are
something you could use. However, if you just use return types, the user of
the function will not know what those types are for. A better way would be:
({bool result, String name}) processString(String name) {
  return (result: true, name: name);
}
Here you are giving names to the variables.
Runes represent Unicode code points, which are the numerical values
assigned to characters in the Unicode standard. Unicode is a universal
character encoding system that enables consistent representation of text
across different platforms and languages. The characters package in Dart
provides tools for working with individual characters and their Unicode
representations.

--- Page 46 ---
Note: Dart uses the convention of using an underscore before a variable name to indicate that
the variable is private. This applies to functions as well. The compiler will enforce this so that
only the class defining it will be able to use it.
There is also the late keyword. This allows you to tell the compiler that
the variable will be initialized later in the program. But be careful! If you
define a variable as late and try to use it before it has been initialized, your
application will crash.
You can also define a variable as a const variable. This says that it will
never change and is useful for defining strings and numbers that you will
use through-out your application. In fact, the Dart linter will recommend
using const for widgets that do not change.
Dart also uses generics. This is a way to reuse code for different types of
variables. For example, the built-in List class can be used for any type. It
is defined as: List<T> where T is any type.
You can also use the typedef keyword to define an alias for a type. For
example:
typedef StringList = List<String>;
This defines a new type called StringList, which is just a list of strings.
Null safety
In Dart 2.12, null safety was introduced. This feature allows you to safely
use variables that can either be null or not and to check their state. This
feature solves a lot of crashes in earlier programs. Dart 3.0 became 100%
null safe, with all types being non-nullable by default and requiring the ?
after a type to signify nullability. It helps solve the problem of null pointer
exceptions. This occurs when a variable is accessed before it has been set.
This has caused many crashes in programs in the past. With this update, the
compiler ensures you do not use a nullable variable incorrectly. To declare a
variable as nullable, simply append a question mark at the end of the
variable type.
For example:
String? name;

--- Page 47 ---
When you use this variable, you have to use the question mark, like the
following code:
void printNameLength(Simple simple) {
  print(simple.name?.length);
}
Class Simple {
  String? name;
  int age = 1;
}
Simple simple = Simple();
printNameLength(simple);
You can also use the ?? operator. This allows you to check for a null result:
print(simple.name ?? ‘No name’);
If you know a variable is not null, you can append it with the ! character,
like this:
print(simple.name!);
Be careful though as this will crash your application if it is null.
Control flow
At the heart of programming is the ability to decide what to do based on the
values of variables. This is done through control flow. Dart has some of the
same control flow keywords as other languages. As your function executes,
it may need to make decisions based on the value of a variable. The
following keywords let you make decisions and perform different actions
based on those values.
Branches
There are two types of branching keywords: if and switch. If is usually
used to check one statement at a time while a switch is used to check many

--- Page 48 ---
different types.
If
The if keyword is used to check if a condition is true or false. If you want
to perform additional checks you can use the else if or else keywords.
For example:
if (showWidget()) {
  MyWidget();
} else if (showOtherWidget()) {
  MyOtherWidget();
} else {
  NormalWidget();
}
This code first checks the value of the showWidget function. If it is true,
then MyWidget is used. If not, it checks the next else if. If that value
is true, then MyOtherWidget is used, otherwise, the NormalWidget is
used.
Switch
A switch will look something like the following code:
var type = ‘File’;
switch (type) {
  case ‘File’: 
print(‘The type is a File’);
  case ‘Directory:
print(‘The type is a Directory);
  case ‘Image:
print(‘The type is an Image);

--- Page 49 ---
  default:
print(‘Unknown type’);
}
This checks for the type to be any of the following strings. Use the
default keyword to catch any type other than the ones provided. Another
way to use a switch is with an expression:
final result = switch (expression) {
  pattern1 => expression1,
  pattern2 => expression2,
  // ... more patterns and expressions
  _ => defaultExpression // Optional default case
};
This is a concise way to get a value based on the expression.
Loops
Loops are used for going through a list of items or conditions. There are
two types of loops provided which are for and while.
The most common type of for loop uses a variable for incrementing. For
example:
for (var counter = 0; counter < 5; counter++) {
  print(‘counter is $counter’);
}
This for loop creates the counter variable and prints the statement:
‘counter is $counter’ where $counter is the value of
counter. Another example of a for loop without an index is the for-in
type of loop:
List<String> fruits = ['apple', 'banana', 'orange'];
for (String fruit in fruits) {

--- Page 50 ---
  print(fruit);
}
This does not need an index and avoids any indexing errors (starting at 0 vs
1 or going past the end of the list). The next type of loop is the while. It
comes in two flavors. The first looks like this:
while (shouldContinue()) {
  print(‘Continuing...’);
}
This will call the shouldContinue function and print the statement as
long as that condition is true. The other flavor looks like this:
do {
  print(‘Continuing...’);
} while (shouldContinue());
This does the conditional check after the print statement.
Note: That this will always run at least once as the check is done at the end.
For both branches and loops you can use two other keywords: break and
continue. These keywords allow you to change the flow. If you use
break, it will exit out of the flow. If you use continue, it will skip to
the next iteration.
Functions
Functions are a set of codes that can be reused. They are defined by:
returnType function name (type variable name)
The returnType is the value that the function will return. If you do not
want to return a value, you can use the void keyword. The function name
is just the name you want to call the function (Note: No spaces are allowed
in names). After the parentheses, you define a list of variables with a type
and the name of the variable.

--- Page 51 ---
Functions can also be defined with what is called the arrow syntax. If you
have a one-line definition for a function, you can use the following syntax:
returnType function name (type variable name) => somefunction();
Parameters come in three different configurations:
• Plain: A type followed by a variable name.
• Named: Surround with brackets: {}. This allows callers to prefix the
call with the name of the parameter.
• Optional parameter: Surround with: []. This allows callers to omit the
parameter.
Main function
All Dart and Flutter applications start with the main function:
void main() {
  print(‘Hello World!’);
}
This is the entry point to the application. You can make the main function
asynchronous by adding the async keyword. (Discussed in a later
chapter).
You can also assign functions to variables. This allows you to execute the
function in another function.
Anonymous functions
Anonymous functions look like regular functions but do not have a name.
They are mostly used as the last parameter to a function. Here is an
example:
const list = ['apples', 'bananas', 'oranges'];
final upperCaseList = list.map((item) {
  return item.toUpperCase();
});
The section of code that starts with (item) { is the anonymous function.

--- Page 52 ---
Comments
To help yourself and other developers, it is a good idea to comment on your
code. This helps you when you come back later and wonder why you did
something. Or, for other developers to help them know why you created this
code. There are three different types of comments:
Single line comments
Use two forward slashes like: //. This can be anywhere on a line but
everything after these are part of a comment and are not code. For example,
here is a single-line comment before a MaterialApp widget:
    // The top level Flutter widget
    return const MaterialApp(
Multi-line comments
If you want multi-line comments, surround the code with /* and */.
Anything within these two comment endpoints is treated as a comment and
can cover multiple lines. Here is a multi-line comment:
/**
 * This is the State for the MainApp
 * Used to display the main app
 */
class _MainAppState extends State<MainApp> {
Documentation comments
The third type is a documentation comment. This comment uses three
forward slashes like: ///. This allows you to create comments that can be
generated by a tool for stand-alone documentation. Here is an example of
documentation comments:
/// This is the main entry point for Flutter
/// Use the runApp method to start your app

--- Page 53 ---
void main() {
  runApp(const MainApp());
}
Imports
The import keyword is used to bring in a file or a library to your current
file. To use another file or another package, you have to import the file that
defines the classes you are using. For example:
import ‘package:flutter/material.dart’;
This imports the material library. Now you can use all of the Material
widgets. If you have conflicting imports, you can use the as keyword and
give it another name. This happens when two files have functions or classes
with the same name. Notice in the following example, that both packages
define Element:
import ‘package:lib1/lib1.dart’;
import ‘package:lib2/lib2.dart’ as lib2;
// Uses Element from lib1.
Element element1 = Element();
// Uses Element from lib2
lib2.Element element2 = lib2.Element();
This allows you to prefix a variable with the lib2 name. You can also
show and hide different elements from a library, by adding the show or
hide keywords after the import statement.
import 'package:lumberdash/lumberdash.dart' show 
putLumberdashToWork;
This is for the lumberdash logging library and only shows the
putLumberdashToWork function. By using show, you only bring in

--- Page 54 ---
certain functions instead of importing the whole file. The hide keyword
hides certain functions that may cause a conflict or are not needed. Usually,
you will not need these keywords.
Classes
A class is a blueprint or template for creating objects. It defines a set of
attributes (data members) and methods (functions) that the objects of that
class will possess. In Dart, classes can only inherit from a single class, but
they can use mixins (described below), to get around that. Here is an
example of a simple class:
class Simple {
  final String name;
  final int id;
  Simple({required this.name, required this.id});
  void printName() {
      print('Name is $name with id: $id');
  }
}
This Simple class has two fields named name and id. Since they are
final, they need to be initialized in a constructor. There is a function named
printName that just prints the name and id. Note that this string uses
interpolation, which means you can put variables inside of strings if
prefixed with a dollar sign. If you want to use more complex information,
you would surround the expression with a dollar sign and left and right
brackets, like: ${}. In the following example, the variables cannot be null.
If you want a variable to be null you would add a question mark after the
type, like:
class Simple {
  final String name;
  int? id;

--- Page 55 ---
  Simple(this.name, this.id);
  void setId(int id) {
    this.id = id;
  }
  void printName() {
      print('Name is $name with id: $id');
  }
}
In this example the id field is nullable. If the setId method is not called,
when printName is called it will print id: null.
Constructors
The preceding example used a constructor that took a name and set the
name variable to whatever was passed in when the class was created. You
can also create named constructors. For example:
class Simple {
  final String name;
  int? id;
  Simple({required this.name, this.id});
  void setId(int id) {
    this.id = id;
  }
  void printName() {
    if (id != null) {
      print('Name is $name with id: $id');
    } else {
      print('Name is $name');

--- Page 56 ---
    }
}
final simple = Simple(name: 'Simple');
Notice the brackets in the constructor. As you can see on the last line, you
need to use the name of the variable followed by a colon and then the value.
Notice the required keyword before this .name. If the variable is final,
you will need the required keyword.
To make a subclass of Simple, you would extend that class with the
extends keyword.
class NotSoSimple extends Simple {
  final String description;
  static const int age = 10;
  NotSoSimple({required String name, required 
this.description}) : super(name: name);
}
NotSoSimple adds description and age fields and passes the name to its
parent. You can also override fields or methods. This class subclasses
Simple and overrides the printName method:
class NotSoSimple extends Simple {
  final String description;
  NotSoSimple({required String name, required 
this.description}) : super(name: name);
  void printDescription() {
    print('Description is $description');
  }

--- Page 57 ---
  @override
  void printName() {
    print('Name is $name with description: 
$description');
  }
}
Notice the @override before the printName function. This tells the
compiler that this method overrides the function of the super class.
Mixins
Mixins are like interfaces in other languages except that they can also
provide functionality. They cannot, however, extend any other class or have
constructors. They can provide functionality that many other classes can
use. Here is a simple example:
mixin Animal {
  void run() {
    print('Running');
  }
}
class Dog with Animal {
  void bark() {
    print('Barking');
  }
}
While the Dog class provides the bark method, it also inherits the run
method from the Animal class. If you need a class to have several
different types, mixins are a great way to do that.

--- Page 58 ---
Earlier you saw the description field in the NotSoSimple class. This field
is known as an instance variable and is associated with a specific instance
of a class. What if you need a field or method that belongs to the class itself,
rather than to any specific instance of the class? These are known as static
variables and methods.
class NotSoSimple extends Simple {
  final String description;
  static const int age = 10;
  NotSoSimple({required String name, required 
this.description}) : super(name: name);
  static void printAge() {
    print(‘Age is $age');
  }
  @override
  void printName() {
    print('Name is $name with description: 
$description');
  }
}
print(NotSoSimple.age);
NotSoSimple.printAge();
Now NotSoSimple has a static age. Notice that it cannot be changed and
you can use it by accessing the name of the class and then the field, like:
NotSoSimple.age. You can also call the static printAge method.
Enums
Enums (or enumerations) are a special kind of class that have a fixed set of
constant values. They are very useful when you want to have a class field
that has a fixed set of values. This is very helpful when using switch

--- Page 59 ---
statements as your editor will tell you if you are missing any values, you
should be testing for. Here is an example that specifies all the file types,
your application might handle:
enum FileType {
  any,
  media,
  image,
  video,
  audio,
  custom,
}
FileType, is a simple list of file types. Instead of defining constants with
values like 0, 1, 2, etc., you can use actual names. You would use
FileType like:
final currentFileType = FileType.any
You can even have fields in an enum, like the example below:
enum ChooseEnum {
  mySelf(name: ‘Myself’),
  someoneElse(name: ‘Someone else’),
  both(name: ‘Both myself and someone else’);
  const ChooseEnum({required this.name});
  final String name;
}
The second enum, ChooseEnum, has a name field. This is useful when
you need to store values along with the enum. If you need to know the
position of the enum, you can use the index getter. This will give you the

--- Page 60 ---
index (position) of the enum value within the list of values. To get all the
enum values, you would use FileType.values.
Extensions
Extension methods allow you to extend a class. If you do not have the
ability to change the source of a class, you can extend it with your own
methods. For example, you can extend the String and int classes with extra
functionality.
extension NumberParsing on String {
  int parseInt() {
    return int.parse(this);
  }
}
print(‘92’.parseInt());
To create an extension, use the extension keyword, the name of your
extension, the keyword on, and then the class you would like to extend.
Then enter any methods you like.
Concurrency
While Flutter is a single-threaded framework, Dart supports the idea of
isolates. An isolate is an independent unit of execution that runs in its own
memory space and has a single thread of control. In Flutter, there is always
the main isolate where the UI is rendered. When you run a Dart program,
the Dart runtime runs an event loop where tasks are added to the event
queue to be run. These tasks can be UI tasks, user input, disk IO, or network
requests. In Flutter, you usually do not have to worry about isolates. Flutter
can handle tasks quickly enough that it seems like they are being executed
simultaneously. If you do not try to run too many tasks at once, you should
be ok. How do you know what is too much? If your UI starts slowing down
or stopping altogether, then you may need to investigate restructuring your
code or using another isolate.

--- Page 61 ---
Async/Await
Dart uses two keywords to handle asynchronous code. The async
keyword, to mark a method as asynchronous, and the await keyword to
wait for a result. The await keyword can only be used inside of a method
marked with the async keyword. To fetch data from the internet, you will
need to do this asynchronously. This can be done by creating methods that
return a Future.
Future<MovieResponse?> getTrendingMovies() async {
    return _movieRepository. getTrendingMovies();
}
void main() async {
  final response = await getTrendingMovies();
}
In this example, the getTrendingMovies method returns a
Future<MovieResponse?>. By adding the async keyword you mark
this method as returning a future value. In the main function, you await
the result. This calls the method and does not return until it is finished. You
will learn more about Futures in later chapters.
Streams
Streams are asynchronous and provide values over time. This could be
useful in a chat application where you might be waiting on other users to
add their comments and then the stream would inform you of that change.
Events will continue until you close the stream. One piece of code would
create the stream and another would listen to those events. In addition to
data, streams can send errors.
Streams come in two types: Single subscription and broadcast streams. As
the name implies, a single subscription allows only one listener and does
not produce events until a listener is attached and stops sending when the
listener detaches. A broadcast stream, on the other hand, produces events
even if there are no listeners. Broadcast streams are good for things like
mouse events that you can use and then discard.

--- Page 62 ---
Exceptions
Error handling is very important in any program. Dart uses Exception
and Error classes to indicate that there is a problem. Flutter or your code
can throw an Exception and if you do not catch it, your application will
crash. One difference Dart has from other programming languages is that
Dart can throw any object, not just an Exception or Error. However,
you will usually create classes that implement Exception. If one of your
methods throws an exception, it is very important that you document it, as
Dart only has unchecked exceptions. This means that the compiler will not
tell you if your code does not catch a thrown exception. To catch an
exception, you would wrap the code that could throw an exception with a
try/catch bracket. The following is a simple class that throws an exception
when the throwException method is called. It takes a required name
but does not require an id. The printName method simply prints out the
values of the class’s fields.
class Simple {
  final String name;
  int? id;
  Simple({required this.name, this.id});
  void setId(int id) {
    this.id = id;
  }
  void throwException() {
    throw Exception('This is an exception');
  }
  void printName() {
    if (id != null) {
      print('Name is $name with id: $id');
    } else {

--- Page 63 ---
      print('Name is $name');
    }
  }
}
final simple = Simple(name: 'Simple');
try {
  print(simple.printName());
  simple.throwException();
} catch (exception) {
    print('Exception Thrown $exception');
}
In this example, Simple has a throwException method. When
simple.throwException() is called, the exception is caught and
Exception Thrown is printed. In this example, we used the catch
keyword, but you can also use on Exception catch to catch a
specific type of exception. If you need to catch multiple exceptions and then
run some cleanup code, you can use the finally keyword. This allows
you to run some code after any catch code is run.
Errors represent a serious problem that cannot be recovered from. This is
usually thrown from the system, but your code can throw it too. Examples
include OutOfMemoryError and StackOverflowError.
Conclusion
This has been a crash course in Dart and you might feel overwhelmed. Use
this as a reference as you go through the book. You now have a solid
understanding of the Dart programming language, and this will help you in
writing Flutter applications.
In the next chapter, you will learn all about Flutter’s basic widgets and
finally get to writing your first application.

--- Page 64 ---
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 65 ---
CHAPTER 3
Building the Movie App
Introduction
In this chapter, you will dive into Flutter development by creating your first
app. This chapter guides you through the essential steps of creating a new
app, demystifying widgets, and how State works in Flutter. In this chapter,
you will build a full-fledged movie app showcasing Flutter's power and
versatility. This app will allow users to discover trending movies, explore
detailed information, and watch trailers. Note that while the examples in this
book are demonstrated on a Mac, they also apply to Windows. When
discussing Windows-specific features, we will switch to that platform.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Creating the movie app
• Widgets
• Stateless and stateful widgets
• Hot reload and debugging
• Movie app UI
• Movie architecture
• First steps of the movie app

--- Page 66 ---
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have a comprehensive understanding of
how to create a Flutter app, what widgets are, and how to build and debug
your app. You will also have a good understanding of the movie app and
what you will be building.
Creating the movie app
There are several ways to create a Flutter project. Flutter comes with its own
command-line program called flutter. When you installed Flutter, a
command-line program was installed in the directory where you installed
Flutter. This command-line tool allows you to do many things. You can
create, build, and run Flutter projects. There are also several tools built into
the flutter tool. You also use this tool to upgrade your version of Flutter.
Here are a few popular commands:
• doctor: Check for any errors in the installation of Flutter.
• config: Configure Flutter settings.
• upgrade: Upgrade to the latest version of Flutter.
• build: Build a Flutter app.
• clean: Delete the build and .dart_tool directories.
• run: Run your Flutter app.
• devices: List of connected devices.
• install: Install the Flutter app on a device.
• create: Create a new Flutter project.
To create a new project, use the create command after typing in
flutter. An example is as follows:
flutter create --platforms=macos,windows,ios,android,web --
org=com.bpb.movies .
There are additional options, such as specifying the language used to build
Android or iOS apps, as shown:
--ios-language= objc, swift
--android-language= java, kotlin

--- Page 67 ---
You can even specify a template. The default template is app, but you can
create all of the types as follows:
--template=app, module, package, plugin, plugin_ffi, skeleton
While creating projects from the command line is straightforward, using an
IDE like Visual Studio Code (VS Code) or Android Studio simplifies the
process even further. You will see how to create a new project from VS Code
or Android Studio.
Visual Studio Code
In this chapter, we will be using Android Studio, but if you are more
comfortable with VS Code you can use it. If you want to use Android
Studio, you can skip this section. VS Code is a lightweight and fast app. This
section gives a step-by-step explanation of how to create a new project in VS
Code.
The steps are as follows:
1. Open up VS Code and then press F1 or Shift+Cmd+P.
2. You should see a text field. Type in flutter new. Select the first
item, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 3.1: New project
3. Next, choose the Application template, as shown in the following
figure:

--- Page 68 ---
Figure 3.2: Application template
4. Enter a Project Name. We will be using the name movies for this
project. Refer to the following figure:
Figure 3.3: Project name
5. This will create a new project and open the main.dart file, which
contains the code for a sample counter app. The screen is as follows:

--- Page 69 ---
Figure 3.4: VS Code files
This is just a sample app that allows you to increment a counter with a
button on the screen.
Pressing the small run button (shown in Figure 3.5) will launch the app on
your Mac. The output is as follows:
Figure 3.5: Run buttons

--- Page 70 ---
Figure 3.6: First app
Android Studio
Android Studio, developed by Google with assistance from JetBrains (the
creators of IntelliJ), is another excellent IDE for Flutter development.
The steps for app development using Android Studio are as follows:
1. Open Android Studio and open the File menu by navigating to File |
New | New Flutter Project…, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 71 ---
Figure 3.7: New project menu
2. Next, choose Flutter from the Generators section on the left. Make
sure your Flutter SDK path is set and press Next.

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 3.8: New project
3. Next, enter movies as the Project name. You can modify the Project
location if needed. Provide a brief description and your organization
name (typically in reverse domain name notation: com.mycompany
for mycompany.com). Unlike VS Code, Android Studio allows you to
specify the organization, ensuring correct app settings for Android and
iOS. By default, all platforms are selected, as shown in Figure 3.9.
4. Uncheck any you do not intend to support. Finally, press the Create
button.

--- Page 73 ---
Figure 3.9: New project screen 2
5. You should now see the same counter app created earlier in VS Code.
(Figure 3.4) Congratulations on building your first Flutter app.

--- Page 74 ---
Figure 3.10: Android Studio
6. You can run the app on a physical device (if connected), your desktop,
or the web. To run it on an Android emulator, you will first need to
create one.
7. Click on the devices tab on the right side of the Android Studio window,
as highlighted in the following figure:
Figure 3.11: Device manager

--- Page 75 ---
8. Click the plus (+) icon in the top left corner, as highlighted in Figure
3.11.
9. Choose a Phone type, as shown in Figure 3.12. Here we have selected
the Pixel 8. Click on the Next button.
Figure 3.12: Select hardware
10. Choose one of the API images. It is recommended to choose a newer
one, but not an experimental or privacy image. You may have to
download the image by pressing the Download button. Once
downloaded, select Next. The following figure shows the output
window of this step:

--- Page 76 ---
Figure 3.13: Select image
11. Enter a name for the device (or leave the default). It is recommended
to change the advanced settings, so click the Show Advanced Settings
button, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 77 ---
Figure 3.14: Virtual device
12. Change the MB to GB for both storage settings and enter 4, as shown
in Figure 3.15. This is not required, but emulators run out of storage.
Press Finish.

--- Page 78 ---
Figure 3.15: Advanced settings
13. You should see your new device in the Device Manager list, as shown
in the following figure. Press the play button on the right to start the
emulator.
Figure 3.16: New device
14. In the top right corner of the window, select the dropdown next to the
debug symbol and select a device to run on, as shown in the following

--- Page 79 ---
figure:
Figure 3.17: Run menu
15. You can choose an iOS simulator, Android emulator, Chrome (web) or
macOS desktop. Once you have chosen your device, you can run by
pressing the run button, in the following figure:
Figure 3.18: Run buttons
16. main.dart is the file that will be run. You should see your emulator,
and then your app will run.

--- Page 80 ---
Figure 3.19: Emulator
Widgets
Flutter is a declarative UI that uses widgets. Widgets are UI classes drawn to
the screen and are meant to have one or more child widgets. This creates a
tree of widgets to form your screen. You usually start with layout-type
widgets like Column, Row, Container, or a higher-level widget like Scaffold.
You then add child widgets until the screen is built out. First, decide how
you want your screen to look, and then add widgets from the top down.
Usually, you will start with a column and then put rows in the column. The
rows can contain text, checkboxes, images, or any other widget. You do not
have to follow the same procedure, but it is a good way to start. Besides
these basic widgets, there are also lists, grids, and some fancy widgets. Other
developers have built their own widgets that you can use by importing their
packages. To see all of Flutter’s widgets, go to their widget catalog:
https://docs.flutter.dev/ui/widgets.
Stateless and stateful widgets

--- Page 81 ---
In addition to the widgets that are included with Flutter, when you create
your app, you need to decide if you want to create either stateless or stateful
widgets. Just as the name implies, one widget has a state that can be
changed, and one does not. Stateless widgets are immutable. They can only
show the information passed to them and cannot change these values.
Stateful widgets are useful because they can hold state. For example, when
you have a text field, you need to keep track of the text controller, which
holds the text the user has entered. This requires your widget to be a stateful
widget.
If you look at main.dart in your current project, you can see everything
you need for a simple project. This project will run on all platforms and will
work without any changes. You have the following:
• main(): Starting function of any app.
• runApp(): Starts Flutter.
• MyApp: An example of a stateless widget. You can name your widgets
anything you want.
• MaterialApp: A starting point that allows you to use widgets with a
Material Design.
• ThemeData: Set up your color scheme.
• MyHomePage: An example of a stateful widget.
• Scaffold: Holder for drawers, bottom sheets, and app bars.
• App bar: Top title section.
• Center: Center one child widget.
• Column: A vertical column of widgets.
• Row: A horizontal row of widgets.
• Text: Display non-editable text.
As you can see, the MyHomePage widget is a stateful widget because it has
a _counter field that is used for updating. When the button is pushed, this
value is incremented, and the widget is rebuilt. MyApp is stateless because it
does not change.
Hot reload and debugging

--- Page 82 ---
One of the best features of Flutter is its ability to perform a hot reload or hot
restart. This means that once you have started your app on a device, you can
change the code in your editor, hit hot reload, and your app is updated
without the need to rebuild and re-install the app. This saves a lot of time.
The difference between the two is that hot reload keeps the screen where it is
and just reloads any code that has changed, whereas hot restart restarts the
app from the very beginning. This is useful if you have made major changes
because, in that case, a hot reload will not work.
Movie app UI
In this section, you will be developing a movie app. This app will use the
popular The Movie Database (TMDB) API to get trending and popular
movies. You will be able to see the cast, description, and trailers from the
movie. In addition, beautiful movie poster images will be shown. The
following are some of the Figma (a popular design app) designs, along with
the steps:
1. The first section is the home screen, as shown in Figure 3.20. This
shows a carousel of trending movies and has a list of trending, popular,
and top-rated movies. The user can click on a movie, and they are taken
to the details screen.

--- Page 84 ---
Figure 3.20: Home screen
2. The details screen is next, as shown in Figure 3.21. This shows an
image of the film, an overview, some buttons to favorite, rate, and share,
a list of trailers, and a list of the cast.

--- Page 85 ---
Figure 3.21: Details screen
3. The next section is the Genre screen, as shown in Figure 3.22. This
screen allows you to search by name and genre.

--- Page 86 ---
Figure 3.22: Genre screen
Movie architecture

--- Page 87 ---
There are a lot of architectures out there, but the important thing to keep in
mind when selecting an architecture is that you should create code that is
simple to use, test, and update. Use libraries that you like and are easy to
use. A typical architectural pattern is clean architecture.
Clean architecture
Clean architecture is a software design philosophy that promotes the
separation of concerns and prioritizes the independence of a system's core
business logic from its external details (like frameworks, databases, and UI).
It is a way of structuring your codebase to make it more testable,
maintainable, and flexible over time. Try to make your classes as
independent as possible. The following are some areas that clean
architecture covers:
• Layering: Layer components into distinct layers. Common layers are:
o Domain/Entities for core business logic and models
o Use cases for application logic
o Interface adapters: Controllers, gateways and presenters
o Frameworks and drivers: UI, Database, devices
• Dependency rule: This rule states that higher-level components
(domain/logic) should not depend on lower-level components like UI,
frameworks, or databases.
• Abstraction: Create interfaces to be able to swap out components
without affecting the whole application. This is very useful in testing.
• Testability: Writing single-responsibility components makes it easier to
test.
SOLID
SOLID stands for: (S) Single-Responsibility Principle, (O) Open-Closed
Principle, (L) Liskov Substitution Principle, (I) Interface Segregation
Principle, and (D) Dependency Inversion Principle. The explanation for
each is:
• Single-Responsibility Principle: Each component should have a single,
well-defined responsibility.
• Open-closed Principle: Software entities (classes, modules, functions,

--- Page 88 ---
etc.) should be open for extension, but closed for modification.
o Open for extension: This means that you should be able to add
new features or behaviors to a software entity without changing its
existing code. This is often achieved through inheritance, interfaces,
or other extensibility mechanisms.
o Closed for modification: The entity's core functionality should
remain stable and unchanged. Modifying existing code can introduce
bugs and break existing dependencies, so it should be avoided as
much as possible.
• Liskov Substitution Principle: It states that objects of a superclass
should be replaceable with objects of its subclasses without affecting the
correctness of the program. In other words, if a program uses a
superclass, it should be able to use objects of any subclasses without any
unexpected behavior.
• Interface Segregation Principle: No client should be forced to depend
on methods they do not use. Instead of having large, monolithic
interfaces, create smaller, more focused interfaces that are specific to the
classes needs.
• Dependency Inversion Principle:
o High-level components (like business logic or policies) should not
be directly tied to the specific implementation details of lower-level
components (like utility functions or database access).
o Both high-level and low-level components should depend on
abstractions, such as interfaces or abstract classes. This is a bit
complicated, but you should know the terminology.
Folder structure
In this section, we will use different folders to represent different areas of the
app. The folder structure is as follows:
data/
│── database/
│── models/

--- Page 89 ---
│── models/
│── repository/
│── sources/
network/
router/
ui/
│── screens/
│── themes/
│── widgets/
utils/
As you move through the chapters, you will create these sections. For
example, when you are in the networking chapter, you will create the files to
access the network. You will also need to create models for the networking
portion.
First steps of the Movie app
Now that you know more about architecture, it is time to clean up the app.
Since you want a movie app and not the default counter app, you need to
delete the code generated when you created the project. Open main.dart
in Android Studio and delete the MyApp and MyHomePage widgets. Only
the main method should be present. You will see an error in the main
because MyApp does not exist. Add the following code:
class MainApp extends StatefulWidget {
const MainApp({super.key});
  @override
  State<MainApp> createState() => _MainAppState();
}
class _MainAppState extends State<MainApp> {

--- Page 90 ---
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return const MaterialApp(
      title: 'Movies',
      debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
      home: MainScreen(),
    );
  }
}
Now, change MyApp to MainApp. You will notice that the main screen
shows an error as you have not yet created the MainScreen widget. This
code creates a stateful widget, starts with a MaterialApp widget, has a
title of Movies, does not show the debug banner, and has a child of
MainScreen. In the left-hand project window, create a new ui folder
under lib, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 91 ---
Figure 3.23: Project list
In the ui folder, create a new file called main_screen.dart. Delete the
widget_test.dart file. Then add the following code to main_screen.dart:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
class MainScreen extends StatefulWidget {
  const MainScreen({super.key});
  @override
  State<MainScreen> createState() => 
_MainScreenState();

--- Page 92 ---
}
class _MainScreenState extends State<MainScreen> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return const Placeholder();
  }
}
This code creates a stateful widget and returns a Placeholder widget. As
its name implies, it is an excellent widget for filling the screen with a widget
showing something that should go in that space. Return to main.dart and
add the import for the main screen. Run your app, and you should see the
following screen:
Figure 3.24: Main screen
This will prepare you for the next chapter, in which you will learn more
about different widgets and start implementing some screens.
Conclusion

--- Page 93 ---
In this chapter, you created your first app and are on your way to creating an
excellent movie app. You also gained a solid understanding of widgets and
the differences between stateless and stateful widgets. You learned about the
advantages of hot reloading and learned a lot about different architectures.
In the next chapter, you will learn the basic widgets needed to build an app.
You will learn about all the files created during the project creation. Then,
you will learn in detail some of the important building blocks of a Flutter
app. Finally, you will build the movie home screen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 94 ---
CHAPTER 4
Basic Widgets
Introduction
In this chapter, we cover most of the basic Flutter widgets, from rows to
columns, text, and images. You will learn how to build a full screen from the
top down. It is also important to learn about the file structure of a Flutter app
and what all the files and folders mean. We will also look at the other
building blocks of a Flutter app. Then, you will build the home screen for the
movie app.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Flutter project structure
• Scaffold, AppBar, and NavigationBar
• Containers, rows, and columns
• Text, images, and icons
• Buttons and input fields
• Build the movie home screen
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding of Flutter
widgets and will have built the home screen for your movie app. You will

--- Page 95 ---
understand how the file structure of a Flutter app is laid out and what all the
files in a project are for. You can create your own screen by using Scaffolds,
columns, and rows and then populate them with buttons and text fields.
Finally, you will put that knowledge into practice by building the home
screen of the movie app.
Flutter project structure
In the previous chapter, you created your first app. Now it is time to learn
what all the files and folders mean. One of the most important files is
pubspec.yaml.
pubspec.yaml
The pubspec.yaml file defines your project and all the packages and
plugins you will need for your app. Open up pubspec.yaml. YAML
Ain't Markup Language (YAML) is an easy-to-read file that has a field, a
colon, and then a value. One of the key aspects of YAML files is the
indentation. You start at the left side, add a field name, and child elements
are indented in two spaces. Ensure that it is spaces and not tabs. Not three
spaces, but two. If you get it wrong, the build will not work.
Pubspec fields
The elements under the field are as follows:
• name: At the top is the name field. Here you can put the name of the
project.
• description: This describes your app. Go ahead and change this to
describe your app. I put in Select your favorite movies
and watch them later, but you can use anything.
• publish_to: URL to publish. Currently, it is set to none. If you want to
publish your project to pub.dev, you will need to remove this line.
• version: This is just the current version of your app. Update it every time
you send out a new version.
• environment: Define the Dart SDK and Flutter version. This is very
important. Normally you will not change this unless a major Flutter
version comes out and you support it. Right now, it is set to:

--- Page 96 ---
'>=3.3.4 <4.0.0'. This means that it supports Flutter versions
3.3.4 up to (but not including) 4.0.0. So, every time you run flutter
upgrade, Flutter’s version increases and as long as the version number
is between these two numbers, you can just rebuild and run your app.
Note that this YAML file supports plain Dart projects as well. To tell the
system that you are using Flutter, you need to add it as a dependency.
• dependencies: Define the packages and plugins to use in the app.
The following:
  flutter:
    sdk: flutter
tells the build system to include the Flutter SDK. Next are the packages and
plugins that your app uses. Currently, only the cupertino_icons
package is provided. This is a set of icons for use on the iOS platform. Try
adding the material icons pages by adding the following:
  material_symbols_icons: ^4.2719.3
below cupertino_icons. Make sure it is indented two spaces. Next,
click on Pub get at the top of the file. Now you can use the Material Design
icons. Finally, there are the dev_dependencies. These are used for
builders and other libraries that are needed during the development phase of
your project. For writing unit tests, use the following:
  flutter_test:
    sdk: flutter
For integration tests, use the following:
  integration_test:
    sdk: flutter
At the very end is the Flutter-specific area. Here, you can set the flag to use
Material Design, as follows:
  uses-material-design: true
After that, you would have an assets section where you would define the
assets for your app.
Lints

--- Page 97 ---
Flutter uses the flutter_lints package to check for valid code. This is
a very useful feature that allows the system to catch errors as well as code
style errors. To add the flutter_lint package, open up
pubspec.yaml and add the following under the dev_dependencies
section below:
flutter_test:
  flutter_lints: ^2.0.0
Click on the Pub get button in the window (or use the command). Next,
open up analysis_options.yaml. This file is where you put all of
your lint settings. We have one lint we want to add, and that is to require the
full package name for imports. There are several settings for this. Under the
rules section add the following (make sure it is indented two spaces from the
rules section):
    avoid_relative_lib_imports: true
    always_use_package_imports: true
    prefer_relative_imports: false
Now, whenever you add an import, lint will suggest adding the full package
name.
lib folder
The most important folder is the lib folder. This is where your dart files
reside. You can put them in nested folders however you like.
Folders
There are several other folders at the top level. Most are platform-specific.
For example, the android folder contains all the files needed to run on an
Android device. You will normally not need to change these files except to
add things like Android icons. iOS is for the iPhone, macOS is for the Mac,
windows for Windows, etcetera. For unit tests, use the test folder, and
for integration tests, use integration_test. There is no assets
folder, but if you want to add files for your app, you must create this folder
and add files you can load into your app in that directory.

--- Page 98 ---
Scaffold, AppBar, and NavigationBar
In this section, we will look at Scaffold, AppBar, and NavigationBar.
Widgets
The Flutter team likes to say that everything is a widget. That includes UI
elements that do not draw anything independently but just lay out their child
widgets. While all these widgets are just widgets, they have different
purposes.
Scaffold
Starting at the very top is the Scaffold. A Scaffold is a Material Design
widget that lays out a full screen. It has the following parameters:
• appBar: A toolbar for a title, actions, and a navigation menu.
• body: This widget will be displayed in the middle, taking up the rest of
the screen.
• floatingActionButton: A small button that floats at the bottom right of
the screen.
• bottomNavigationBar: A bar at the bottom of the screen for navigating
between screens.
• drawer: A side menu tied to the AppBar. A menu that slides in from the
left or right.
All these items are optional except for the body, which is your content. A
Scaffold is also needed to show snackbars, which are temporary floating
message windows that display errors or messages.
AppBar
The AppBar is useful for showing the page title, having a menu for options,
and a back button. Note that the AppBar is useful for mobile devices and not
as useful on the desktop or web. Having more room allows other ways of
displaying information. The FloatingActionButton is mostly seen on
Android platforms but can also be used on iOS. It is useful for creating new
items but can be used for almost anything. Some nice packages do things
like explode the button into more items.

--- Page 99 ---
BottomNavigationBar
The BottomNavigationBar is very useful when your app has three or four
screens. The navigation bar allows the user to switch between the screens by
clicking a button at the bottom. You will be using this for the movie app.
Note that this does not mean you cannot have more than four screens. You
can easily go to other screens from those three or four screens, or you can
have a final screen of options that shows a list of other screens.
Drawer
Some apps use a drawer to display a menu of other options. Although its
design has fallen out of favor among designers, some apps still use it.
Snackbar
A snackbar is a small floating window that shows a message for a short time,
usually for errors. You must have a Scaffold as a parent to show a snackbar.
Containers, rows, and columns
Some layout widgets you can use are containers, rows, and columns. A
container holds one child widget, which you can decorate with a background
color, set a width and height, and other options.
Container
A container allows you to surround your widget with the following:
• Background color: Provide a background color.
• Padding: Pad the interior before showing the widget.
• Alignment: Align widgets to different sides of the container.
• Decoration: Add all kinds of decorations, like rounded borders.
• Width and height: Set the size of the widget.
• Transform: Transform the container with a matrix. This is a powerful
way to rotate, translate, or scale the container.
The following is an example of a small circle with text inside of the middle:
 Container(

--- Page 100 ---
  width: 16,
  height: 16,
   decoration: const BoxDecoration(
  shape: BoxShape.circle,
       color: Colors.red,
                          ),
  child: Center(
  // Center the text
 child: Text(
   ‘1’,
   ),
  ),
 )
As you can see, the Container is very powerful.
Column
You will probably be using the Column widget frequently as it allows you
to layout a list of items in a vertical format. Looking at the design image of
the home page of the movie app, you would start with a Column and then
add different widgets to build the screen. The following is an example
Column:
Column(
     mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
     crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
     mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
     children: [
Text(‘Hello’)

--- Page 101 ---
     ]
)
A Column has four main components:
• mainAxisAlignment: How the widgets are aligned going down. Left,
right or center.
• crossAxisAlignment: How the widgets are aligned going across. Left,
right or center.
• mainAxisSize: Take up a minimum or maximum height. Fill the screen
or not.
• children: Add a list of child widgets.
There are also a few lesser-used parameters like:
• textDirection: Direction of the text. This will be left to right or right to
left.
• verticalDirection: Defaults to down.
• textBaseline: Align text based on alphabetic characters or ideographic
characters.
• clipBehavior: Allows for clipping if content overflows.
It is important to set the mainAxisSize, as a Column defaults to max.
The following are the mainAxisAlignment values:
• start: Left aligned.
• end: Right aligned.
• center: Center widgets.
• spaceBetween: Evenly add free space between the widgets.
• spaceAround: Add free space at the ends.
• spaceEvenly: Add free space at the ends and in between.
The crossAxisAlignment is similar but different. It has the following:
• start: Left aligned.
• end: Right aligned.
• center: Center widgets.
• stretch: Require widgets to fill the cross axis.
• baseline: Align along the baseline of widgets. Usually used with text.

--- Page 102 ---
Rows
Rows lay their children horizontally. This is ideal for widgets that go across
the screen. Rows have the same parameters as a Column but have a
horizontal direction. The following is an example Row:
Row(
      mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,
      children: [
        Text(text),
        const Spacer(),
        TextButton(
            onPressed: () {},
            child: Text(
              'More',
            ),
          ),
      ],
    );
Here we have a Text widget, a Spacer (to fill up extra space and push the
button to the right), and a TextButton. This makes up a row that fills up
the width of the screen.
Text, images, and icons
Text, images, and icons are a few of the most used widgets.
Text
Text is for static text that is shown on the screen. The Text widget has
many parameters:
• data: String value.

--- Page 103 ---
• Style: TextStyle information on color, font, and size.
• strutStyle: Sets the minimum line height (not used much).
• textAlign: How the text is aligned horizontally.
• textDirection: Left to right, or right to left.
• Locale: Set the user’s language and country. Should be rarely used as
there is a current global Locale.
• softWrap: If true, the text should break when needed in a space.
• overflow: If the text overflows its drawing area, what should happen?
This will depend on the following command:
o clip: Just cut off the text
o fade: Fade the text
o ellipsis: Add ... to the end of the text
o visible: Render text outside of the box
• textScaler: How text should be scaled for better readability (not used
much).
• maxLines: Useful for specifying whether the text should be a specific
number of lines or if set to null, as many lines as needed.
• semanticsLabel: mostly used for accessibility purposes, but some
testing systems use semantics to find text fields.
• textWidthBasis: A way of measuring the width of one or more lines.
• textHeightBehavior: How to apply a style’s height (not used much).
• selectionColor: Color of text when selected.
There are many fields, but you will probably only use the actual text and a
style. There are times when maxLines come in handy, but in general, this
is a pretty easy widget to use.
The following is a simple example:
Text('My Favorites', style: TextStyle(fontSize: 24,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w600,
  color: Colors.white))
Images

--- Page 104 ---
Flutter uses the Image widget to display images. This widget can handle
images from several sources:
• Local assets directory
• Internet
• File
• Memory
• ImageProvider: Class used to return an image
There are several parameters for creating an image. The most important ones
are as follows:
• Width and height: Define the size of the image
• Color: color to be blended with each pixel
• Opacity: Animation for handling opacity
• Fit: Very important for sizing. Uses the BoxFit enum with:
o fill: Fills the target but distorts the aspect ratio
o contain: As large as possible inside of the target
o cover: As small as possible while covering the target
o fitWidth: Full width (height is adjusted)
o fitHeight: Full height (width is adjusted)
o none: Center and not resized
o scaleDown: Center and scale down if needed
You can use static constructors for the different types like: Image.file,
Image.network, and Image.asset. The following is a simple asset
image:
Image.asset('assets/cat.png')
For network images, you might have something as follows:
Image.network(
     'url',
      width: 120,
      height: 98,

--- Page 105 ---
      fit: BoxFit.fill)
Icons
Icons are a way to show standard images without having to create them
yourselves. There are the cupertino_icons or the material design icons.
Inside the material_symbols_icons package is a file named
symbols.dart. This has all the icons available. If you go to
https://fonts.google.com/icons, you will see a page as follows:
Figure 4.1: Material icons
Many common icons are needed for an app. Close, Arrow Back button
icons, and more. On this page, you can easily search for an icon that will

--- Page 106 ---
meet your needs. The following is an example of a search icon (the first icon
in the list above):
const Icon(Icons.search, color: Colors.white,)
Many times, you will use these icons inside of an IconButton class. This
provides a click listener for the icon. Also, notice the const before the
Icon. Android Studio and Flutter lints will remind you to use const before
any widget that does not use any dynamic content.
Buttons and more
In this section, we will learn about widgets like buttons, selection, chips,
DatePicker, and more.
Buttons
Buttons are an essential part of a UI. They allow the user to select and
perform an action. There are many types of buttons:
• IconButton: For showing an icon
• TextButton: A button with text, no decoration
• ElevatedButton: Adds dimension to a button
• FilledButton: Fill a button with a color
• OutlinedButton: Rounded corner outline
• FloatingActionButton: Floating button.
• SegmentedButton: Checkable sections
These are some of the more common buttons. There is now an
ExtendedFloatingActionButton that allows you to have text along with the
icon.
Selection
In addition to buttons, there are other widgets that allow you to select. The
most common is the Checkbox. Note that this is just the box, not the text.
Usually, you will have these two widgets together.
Chips

--- Page 107 ---
Chips are a newer widget and there are several different types:
• InputChip: For attribute information. Contains an icon, text, and close
button
• ChoiceChip: Are selectable and have a checkmark when selected
• FilterChip: Represent filters have an icon and text
• ActionChip: Allow the user to start an action by clicking on the chip
You will be using the FilterChip class to select genres when searching
for movies.
DatePicker
This widget allows you to create a popup window for selecting a date. A
sample popup is as follows:
Figure 4.2: DatePicker
An example is as follows:

--- Page 108 ---
DatePickerDialog(
          restorationId: 'date_picker_dialog',
          initialEntryMode: 
DatePickerEntryMode.calendarOnly,
          initialDate: 
DateTime.fromMillisecondsSinceEpoch(arguments! as 
int),
          firstDate: DateTime(2021),
          lastDate: DateTime(2022),
);
PopupMenuButton
A menu that is usually tied to a button and shown when the user selects it.
An example is as follows:
Figure 4.3: PopupMenuButton
The following is an example:
PopupMenuButton<String>(
   initialValue: ‘Item 1’,
   onSelected: (String item) {
       setState(() {
           selectedItem = item;

--- Page 109 ---
       });
   },
   itemBuilder: (BuildContext context) => 
<PopupMenuEntry<String>>[
       const PopupMenuItem<String>(
          value: ‘Item 1’,
             child: Text('Item 1'),
          ),
       const PopupMenuItem<String>(
           value: ‘Item 2’,
              child: Text('Item 2'),
           ),
       const PopupMenuItem<String>(
           value: ‘Item 3’,
              child: Text('Item 3'),
           ),
    ],
 )
Radio button
Another common widget is the radio button. It will look like something as
follows:
Figure 4.4: Radio buttons

--- Page 110 ---
Slider
This widget is less common but useful for allowing the user to visually pick
values. It has minimum and maximum values. It will look as follows:
Figure 4.5: Slider
Switch
A visual way to turn something on or off. It has two states, on and off, and
will look like this:
Figure 4.6: Switch
TimePicker
Like the DatePicker, the TimePicker allows the user to choose a specific
time, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 111 ---
Figure 4.7: TimePicker
Text input
To allow the user to enter text, you can use the TextField widget. A
TextField requires a TextEditingController, which means it
needs to be inside of a StatefulWidget. A
TextEditingController holds the value of the text the user entered.
To update the text in the field, you need to update the controller's text value.
If you do not supply a controller, one will be created for you. The easiest
way to create and destroy a controller is in the initState and destroy
methods of a State class. The code is as follows:
class LoginDialog extends StatefulWidget {
  const LoginDialog({super.key});
  @override
  State createState() => _LoginDialogState();
}
class _LoginDialogState extends State<LoginDialog> 
{
  late TextEditingController emailTextController;

--- Page 112 ---
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
    emailTextController = 
TextEditingController(text: '');
  }
  @override
  void dispose() {
    emailTextController.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  }
}
Then, to use a TextField, you would do something as follows:
TextField(
    keyboardType: TextInputType.emailAddress,
    onSubmitted: (value) {},
    controller: emailTextController,
),
There are several options for TextFields, as follows:
• controller: Holds the text value.
• focusNode: Used to focus or unfocused where the user is adding text.
• undoController: Keeps track of the changes. Allows listening to
changes and undoing/redoing those changes.
• decoration—inputDecoration: Lots of options for changing the border,
labels, icons, styles etcetera.
• keyboardType: Useful for email, number, dates, password, and phone.
• textCapitalization: Can automatically capitalize words, sentences, or
characters.

--- Page 113 ---
• Style: Input text style.
• textAlign: Align text to different sides of the container.
• maxLines, minLines: Min/max lines.
• maxLength: Maximum number of characters.
• onChanged: Listener for every time a user updates the text.
• onSubmitted: Listener for the final entry.
There are many more fields that can be used, but these are the main ones that
you will generally use.
Build movie app screens
In the previous chapter, you saw a design for the home screen. The following
is that figure with sections drawn in red:

--- Page 114 ---
Figure 4.8: Home screen
If you look at the overall design, you can see that there is a column of rows.
The column goes down while the rows go across. Inside your lib folder,
create two new folders. Inside the ui folder, create screens, and then
inside of that folder, create a home. Next, create the home_screen.dart
file inside of that folder. Next, add the following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
class HomeScreen extends StatefulWidget {

--- Page 115 ---
  const HomeScreen({super.key});
  @override
  State<HomeScreen> createState() => 
_HomeScreenState();
}
class _HomeScreenState extends State<HomeScreen> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return const Placeholder();
  }
}
This adds a screen with another placeholder. Return to
main_screen.dart and change Placeholder() with
HomeScreen(). Import the home screen, then hot reload the app, and you
should see the same thing as before. Next, add the Now Playing headline.
Inside of HomeScreen, replace Placeholder() with the following:
    return Scaffold(
      body: Column(
        children: [
          Text('Now Playing')],
      ),
);
Press hot reload. You will see:

--- Page 116 ---
Figure 4.9: Title
As you can see, the title is in the status area. By default, Flutter draws to the
whole screen. To avoid this, you must ensure you draw in a safe area. One
shortcut in Android Studio is to use option-return on a widget. This will
bring up a menu, as shown in the following figure:


--- Page 117 ---
Figure 4.10: Wrap menu
Click on the Column widget and select Wrap with widget... Then type
SafeArea. You should see the following:
    return SafeArea(
      child: Scaffold(
        body: Column(
          children: [
            Text('Now Playing')],
        ),
      ),
    );
Hot reload. Now it looks as follows:


--- Page 118 ---
Figure 4.11: SafeArea
To make the text bigger, you need to change the text style. We also want to
center it. How would you do that? One very convenient widget is the Align
widget. Change the text to the following:
const Align(
     alignment: Alignment.center,
     child: Text('Now Playing'))
Hot reload, and you should see it in the center. It looks too close to the top.
Maybe add some padding?
Option-return on the Text widget and select the Wrap with Padding…
option. It will default to 8 pixel margins. We want to have some vertical
spacing. Specifically, 16 pixels on the top and 24 at the bottom. Change the
padding to the following:
const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(0, 16.0, 0, 24)
The left, top, right, bottom (LTRB) is the order that the values are in. Hot
reload, and it should look better. Notice that with hot reload, we can design
our screen as we go. This saves a lot of time. Now for the style. The
screenshot is from the Figma app, which is a design tool that designers use.
When we click on the Now Playing title, we see that it is Roboto semibold
24. We will cover fonts in a different chapter, but for now, we want the font
to be bold and 24 pixels tall. After the Now Playing text, add the
following:
, style: TextStyle(fontSize: 24, fontWeight: FontWeight.w600)
The weights for fonts range from 100 to 900. The higher the number, the
bolder the text. Hot reload. The screen will be as follows:

--- Page 119 ---
Figure 4.12: Centered title
You have a title, but if you compare it to the design, the background is black,
and the text is white. To get a background color, you can use a Container.
Surround the column with a Container and set the color to
0xFF111111 like this:
Container(
        color: const Color(0xFF111111),
Now, the title is not visible. Change the color of the text style as follows:
, color: Colors.white
Hot reload. You should see the following:

--- Page 120 ---
Figure 4.13: Colors
Next, you will add some libraries to help with the carousel at the top. Open
up pubspec.yaml, and after material_symbols_icons add:
  card_swiper: ^3.0.0
  cached_network_image: ^3.3.1
The first package adds a carousel, and the second is for caching network
images. Press the Pub get button at the top. Next, in the home folder, create
a new file named home_screen_image.dart.
Add the following:
import 
'package:cached_network_image/cached_network_image.
dart';
import 'package:card_swiper/card_swiper.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';

--- Page 121 ---
const delayTime = 1000 * 10;
const animationTime = 1000;
const images = [
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/z1p34vh7dEOnLDmyCrl
UVLuoDzd.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/gKkl37BQuKTanygYQG1
pyYgLVgf.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/4xJd3uwtL1vCuZgEfEc
8JXI9Uyx.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/uuA01PTtPombRPvL9dv
sBqOBJWm.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/H6vke7zGiuLsz4v4RPe
Reb9rsv.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/e1J2oNzSBdou01sUvri
VuoYp0pJ.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/hu40Uxp9WtpL34jv3zy
WLb5zEVY.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/pKaA8VvfkNfEMUPMiiu
L5qSPQYy.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/zK2sFxZcelHJRPVr242
rxy5VK4T.jpg',

--- Page 122 ---
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/7qxG0zyt29BI0IzFDfs
ps62kbQi.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/8Gxv8gSFCU0XGDykEGv
7zR1n2ua.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/zDi2U7WYkdIoGYHcYbM
9X5yReVD.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/cxevDYdeFkiixRShbOb
dwAHBZry.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/uXUs1fwSuE06LgYETw2
mi4JxQvc.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/fdZpvODTX5wwkD0ikZN
aClE4AoW.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/d5NXSklXo0qyIYkgV94
XAgMIckC.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/sh7Rg8Er3tFcN9BpKIP
OMvALgZd.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/sHJ2OIgpcpSmhqXkuSW
xZ3nwg1S.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/upKD8UbH8vQ798aMWgw
MxV8t4yk.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/vfrQk5IPloGg1v9Rzbh

--- Page 123 ---
2Eg3VGyM.jpg',
];
This sets some constants for the swiper animation and an array of images.
Note that we are hard-coding the images that we will be using later in the
book. When we get to the networking section, you will get these images
directly from the network. Next, add the widget:
class HomeScreenImage extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // 1
    final screenWidth = 
MediaQuery.of(context).size.width - 32;
    // 2
    return SizedBox(
      height: 374,
      // 3
      child: Swiper(
        autoplayDelay: delayTime,
        duration: animationTime,
        itemWidth: screenWidth,
        autoplay: true,
        // 4
        itemCount: images.length,
        itemBuilder: (BuildContext context, int 
index) {
          // 5
          return CachedNetworkImage(

--- Page 124 ---
            imageUrl: images[index],
            alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
            fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
            height: 374,
            width: screenWidth,
          );
        },
      ),
    );
  }
}
This code will show a carousel of images. The steps are as follows:
1. Get the width of the screen.
2. Create a fixed height box of 374 pixels.
3. Use the Swiper widget for the carousel and set animation parameters.
4. Set the itemCount to the length of the array.
5. Use the CachedNetworkImage widget to show the image.
Back in the home screen, add HomeScreenImage(), after the Padding
widget, and import the home_screen.dart file. You must stop and
restart the app after adding a new plugin. You should see an automated
carousel of images:

--- Page 125 ---
Figure 4.14: Carousel
The designs show a bottom navigation section that shows home, genre, and
favorites buttons. These buttons will take the user to the three different
screens that you will be creating. To create these, go into
main_screen.dart. We need to replace the single call to the home
screen with a BottomNavigationBar. This class handles the selection
of screens and shows the proper one. Before the build method, add some
new variables:
  var index = 0;
  final List<Widget> screens = <Widget>[];
This will keep track of the current index and the screens list will hold the
three screens. Now add the initState method:
  @override
  void initState() {

--- Page 126 ---
    super.initState();
    screens.add(const HomeScreen());
    screens.add(const Placeholder());
    screens.add(const Placeholder());
  }
Now change the build method to:
@override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
      body: screens[index],
      bottomNavigationBar: BottomNavigationBar(
        items: const [
          BottomNavigationBarItem(icon: 
Icon(Icons.home), label: 'Home'),
          BottomNavigationBarItem(
              icon: Icon(Symbols.genres), label: 
'Genre'),
          BottomNavigationBarItem(icon: 
Icon(Icons.favorite), label: 'Favorites'),
        ],
        currentIndex: index,
        onTap: (navIndex) {
          setState(() {
            index = navIndex;
          });
        },
      ),

--- Page 127 ---
    );
  }
The Scaffold will show the current screen based on the current index. The
BottomNavigationBar holds BottomNavigationBarItem items
that just show the icons and text. The currentIndex is for the screen
index currently selected, and the onTap call will set that index only when
the user selects it. You will notice that the Symbols.genres cannot be
found. This is an icon found in the material_symbols library. Add the
following to pubspec.yaml:
material_symbols_icons: ^4.2719.3
Click on Pub Get. Import the symbols package. Looking back at the
design, you will see three sections named trending, popular, and top-rated
movies. They all look the same, which means they are good candidates for
custom widgets. Start by creating a title row. In the home folder, create a
new file named title_row.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
// 1
typedef OnMoreClicked = void Function();
class TitleRow extends StatelessWidget {
  final String text;
  final OnMoreClicked onMoreClicked;
  const TitleRow({super.key, required this.text, 
required this.onMoreClicked});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // 2

--- Page 128 ---
    return Row(
      // 3
      mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,
      children: [
        Padding(
          padding: const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(16, 
16.0, 0.0, 8.0),
          // 4
          child: Text(text, style: const 
TextStyle(fontSize: 20, fontWeight: 
FontWeight.w600, color: Colors.white)),
        ),
        // 5
        const Spacer(),
        Padding(
          padding: const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(16, 
16.0, 8.0, 0.0),
          // 6
          child: TextButton(
            onPressed: onMoreClicked,
            child: const Text(
              'More',
              style: TextStyle(fontSize: 16, 
fontWeight: FontWeight.w400, color: Colors.white),
            ),
          ),
        ),

--- Page 129 ---
      ],
    );
  }
}
This code shows a row with the passed in text on the left and a More button
on the far right. The steps are as follows:
1. Define a function that will be run when the More button is clicked.
2. Create a row with several children.
3. Have the row take up the full width.
4. Show the passed-in title.
5. Use a Spacer widget to push the button to the right.
6. Use a TextButton to show more text.
Back in home screen, after HomeScreenImage() add the following:
            TitleRow(
              text: 'Trending',
              onMoreClicked: () {
              },
            ),
Hot reload. You should now see the Trending row. Copy and paste the
TitleRow two times and change the text to popular and top-rated. Hot
reload, and you should see three titles in a row.
Movie row
Now, add the scrollable horizontal row for each type of movie. Create a new
.dart file in the home folder named horiz_movies.dart. Add the
following:
import 
'package:cached_network_image/cached_network_image.
dart';

--- Page 130 ---
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
class HorizontalMovies extends StatelessWidget {
  // 1
  final List<String> movies;
  const HorizontalMovies({required this.movies, 
super.key});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // 2
    return SizedBox(
      height: 142,
      // 3
      child: ListView.builder(
          scrollDirection: Axis.horizontal,
          itemCount: movies.length,
          itemBuilder: (context, index) {
            // 4
            return GestureDetector(
              onTap: () {},
              child: SizedBox(
                width: 100,
                height: 142,
                // 5
                child: CachedNetworkImage(
                  imageUrl: movies[index],
                  alignment: Alignment.topCenter,

--- Page 131 ---
                  fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                  height: 100,
                  width: 142,
                ),
              ),
            );
          }),
    );
  }
}
This code will display a horizontal list of images and allow the user to click
on individual images. The steps are as follows:
1. Pass in a list of movie URLs.
2. Each movie will only be 142 pixels high.
3. Use a ListView to show a horizontal list (ListViews will be
covered in more detail in another chapter).
4. Use a GestureDetector to capture a click (GestureDetector
will be covered in more detail in another chapter).
5. Show the image.
Back in the home screen, add the following after the first TitleRow:
            const HorizontalMovies(movies: images,),
Hot reload. You should see at least a part of the images, but what are the
yellow and black striped lines? What are the error messages in the console?
Now, you will be learning some of the hard parts about Flutter. If you read
the error message in the console, you will see the following:
A RenderFlex overflowed by 87 pixels on the bottom.
The relevant error-causing widget was: 
  Column Column:file:///.../Mastering%20Flutter/git/Mastering-
Flutter/Chapter4/final/movies/lib/ui/screens/home/home_screen.dart:2

--- Page 132 ---
1:16
This is saying that the last item in the column went 87 pixels beyond the area
on the screen. To fix this, you need some sort of scrollable widget. There is
an easy fix for this issue. Simply wrap the top Container with the
following:
SingleChildScrollView
Hot reload, and the error should be gone. You will encounter several of these
types of errors as your Flutter career progresses. The following is what your
screen should look like:
Figure 4.15: Scrolling lists

--- Page 133 ---
The project is starting to look like an actual program. Copy the
HorizontalMovies widget after each TitleRow and hot reload. You
should be able to scroll down and see the three lists. You can even scroll
right on the list. That is it for the home screen for now. In upcoming
chapters, we will clean up the screen and get actual data from the network.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about the structure of a Flutter app and most of
Flutter’s basic widgets. Although it was a lot of information, you now have a
handle on the basics of Flutter. We will continue to learn more about themes
and advanced widgets.
In the next chapter, you will learn about colors, typography, and material
design. You will use these to create a theme that sets the color and
typography for the whole app at once.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 134 ---
CHAPTER 5
Themes, Colors and Fonts
Introduction
In this chapter, we will cover all the design elements that make up your app,
from colors that provide a consistent color scheme to fonts that look great
for your app. You will learn about Material Design, Google’s open-source
design system, which makes it easy to create a great-looking app. Finally,
you will create your own theme that incorporates all these elements.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Colors
• Typography
• Material Design
• Google Fonts
• Themes
Objectives
This chapter will help you understand colors, typography, Material Design,
and themes and how to apply them to your app. You will create a color and
text theme that you can use in your movie app. By the end of this chapter,
you will be able to create your own theme and apply it to your apps. You will

--- Page 135 ---
have a solid understanding of the design system that Flutter uses and will be
able to navigate the different components of the system.
Colors
In Flutter, a color is represented as a hexadecimal number made up of the
red, green, blue, and alpha values of a color. Alpha is a number for setting
the opacity of the color. 0xFF means it is completely opaque, and the full
color is shown. 0x00 means that it is fully transparent. You can set the
opacity with the withOpacity method on a color:
var grey = Colors.grey.withOpacity(0.5);
This creates a grey color at a 50% transparent level. There are many
predefined colors in Flutter. Not only are there traditional colors like red,
blue, green, purple, etc., but there are values with different opacity levels.
For example, Color.white70 is a white with 70% opacity. You can use
these colors in your app or create your own. To create your own, you can
either create a new Color class with a hex value as follows:
const primaryRed = Color(0xFFC13437);
You could also use Color methods. These are extension methods:
• fromARGB: alpha, red, green, blue
• fromRGBO: red, green, blue, opacity
Red, green and blue use values from 0 to 255, while opacity is 0.0 to 1.0.
Alpha is from 0 to 255. A lot of widgets can take a color parameter. The
Container widget has a color parameter and looks as follows:
Container(
   color: Color(0xFF111111),
)
For Text, you need to set the color in the TextStyle class, and use the
following code:
Text('Now Playing', style: TextStyle(fontSize: 24, fontWeight: 
FontWeight.w600, color: Colors.white),)),

--- Page 136 ---
Typography
Typography is the technique of arranging text on the screen using different
fonts, font sizes, colors, line spacing, and letter spacing. Normally, you use
typography in text with a TextStyle class. This class defines the different
attributes that will be used to display the text. You can set the font size, font
weight (bold), font, letter spacing, colors, and more. While you can set each
text’s style manually, it is usually easier to define it once and reuse it. You
can create variables for those or set them in a theme (discussed below).
Material Design
Material Design is a design system by Google created to help developers and
designers build beautiful, usable, and consistent digital experiences across
various platforms. Currently, three versions are available: Version one was
released in 2014 and introduced its core principles. Version two was
introduced in 2018, and updated versions one and three were released in
2021. Version three can use a dynamic color system that can adapt to the
currently displayed color. While the material design was originally designed
for Android, it can be used on many other platforms as well. Google uses it
for its Android and web products. You can still use the Material Design
system on iOS, but it will not have the iOS look and feel. However,
designers today usually create designs made for the app and company and
not tied to a particular platform. This way, they can design the app once and
use it on multiple platforms. This could use the company’s colors and a
specific design for their app. Material Design is customizable, so you do not
have to use the default colors and styles. Material Design is built into the
Flutter framework and can be customized by providing a theme with all the
colors, fonts, and styles needed for your app. This system has custom-built
elements such as buttons, cards, dialogs, and other widgets that use this
system.
To use Material Design, you will start your app using the MaterialApp
widget. This allows you to provide a theme (for colors, fonts, and other
styles) and a router (for page navigation). Many Material Design widgets
require a parent Material widget like MaterialApp. If there is no Material
parent, you can use the Material widget to wrap your widget.

--- Page 137 ---
Google Fonts
Google Fonts for Flutter is a package that simplifies the process of using
Google Fonts in your Flutter applications. It allows you to easily access a
vast collection of free, open-source fonts from Google and integrate them
seamlessly into your app's text elements. To see all the fonts provided by
Google, go to https://fonts.google.com/. The fonts page would be displayed
as follows:
Figure 5.1: Google Fonts
Currently, this page lists 1,644 font families. Many of these are for different
languages. This page also allows you to filter the fonts to find the one that
works for you. Google also has a special font family called Noto that has all
the current languages available. For the movie app, we are going to be using
the Roboto font.
The steps to add Google Fonts are as follows:
1. You can add the google_fonts package by using the following
command line:
flutter pub add google_fonts.

--- Page 138 ---
It can also be added by opening up pubspec.yaml in your project and 
adding the following:
google_fonts: ^6.2.1
2. Now, create a new folder for your theme. Inside of the lib/ui folder,
create a folder named theme. Now, create a new file named
theme.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:google_fonts/google_fonts.dart';
var roboto = GoogleFonts.roboto();
This imports the material.dart and google_font packages.
3. Using the GoogleFonts class, use the roboto function to retrieve
an instance of the Roboto TextStyle. Now, let us create some
textStyles needed for the movie app. Add the following:
var largeTitle = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 24,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w600,
  color: Colors.white,
);
This creates a variable named largeTitle that uses roboto, a font
size of 24, a weight of 600 (which is semibold), and a color of white.
Font weights go from w100 (thin) to w900 (thick). Bold is considered a
w700 weight, and normal is a w400 weight.
4. Now add the rest of your styles, using the following code:
var heading1 = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 20,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w600,
  color: Colors.white,
);

--- Page 139 ---
var heading2 = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 18,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w600,
  color: Colors.white,
);
var body1Regular = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 16,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w400,
  color: Colors.white,
);
var body1Bold = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 16,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w700,
  color: Colors.white,
);
var body2Regular = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 14,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w400,
  color: Colors.white,
);
var body2Bold = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 14,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w700,
  color: Colors.white,
);

--- Page 140 ---
var caption = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 12,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w400,
  color: Colors.white,
);
var body3Regular = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 12,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w400,
  color: Colors.white,
);
var body3Bold = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 12,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w700,
  color: Colors.white,
);
var verySmallText = roboto.copyWith(
  fontSize: 10,
  fontWeight: FontWeight.w400,
  color: Colors.white,
);
There are many fonts here, but these are the styles that the app's
designer provided. There are large fonts for titles and smaller ones for
movie cast members' names. Usually, font sizes do not go below 10
pixels, as they become very hard to read.
5. To use these fonts, you would replace the hard-coded styles used with
these variables. Open up home_screen.dart and find the Now
Playing text field. Replace the style with largeTitle. You will

--- Page 141 ---
have to add the following import:
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
This looks a lot cleaner. Having to constantly type large TextStyles
can waste a lot of time.
6. What about colors? If you look above the Now Playing text, you will
see Color(0xFF111111). We can replace this with variables as
well. In theme.dart, add the following colors to the top:
// Colors
const screenBackground = Color(0xFF111111);
const searchBarBackground = Color(0xFF1E1E1E);
const primaryButton = Color(0xFFD9D9D9);
const posterBorder = Color(0xFFB5A9A9);
const buttonGrey = Color(0xFF504F4F);
These are some named variables that you will be using in the app.
7. Now replace that color with screenBackground. The rest of the
colors will be used in the app when you start building the different
screens.
Themes
When a visual or UI designer starts to design an app, they start with a set of
colors, fonts, shapes, and icons. This makes up the theme of the app. With a
theme, every screen should follow that design, making screens consistent for
a beautiful app. Flutter provides a way to use those colors, fonts, shapes, and
icons by providing a theme parameter for the MaterialApp widget. That
parameter is a ThemeData class. This class holds all the information
needed to define the elements of your app. When using widgets in your
Flutter app, if you specify any formatting for that widget, it will override the
system styling. If you do not specify any formatting, Flutter will use the
current theme’s settings.

--- Page 142 ---
There are many ways to create a ThemeData class. The easiest is to use
ThemeData.light(useMaterial3: true) or
ThemeData.dark(useMaterial3: true). This will use either the
light or dark theme defined by Flutter. This sets the theme's brightness level
and uses the other defaults. If you know the main color you want to use for
your app, like blue, then you can use the following command:
ThemeData(
    useMaterial3: true,
    // Define the default brightness and colors.
    colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
    seedColor: Colors.blue,
    brightness: Brightness.dark,
    ),
Here, you specify a seedColor and Flutter creates a color scheme for you.
You can set the brightness as well to either dark or light.
Fully customized theme
If you want to customize your theme fully, you will set the following
parameters:
• colorScheme: Colors for the theme.
• textTheme: Text styles.
• appBarTheme: Theme for the AppBar.
• bottomNavigationBarTheme: Theme for the bottom navigation bar.
• snackBarTheme: Theme for snackbars.
• tabBarTheme: Theme for tabs.
• actionIconTheme: The action icons like back, close and drawer icons.
• textButtonTheme: Theme for text buttons.
• useMaterial3: Flag for using the newer Material 3 design system. This
is true by default.
ColorScheme

--- Page 143 ---
As mentioned above, the easiest way to create a ColorScheme is to use
the fromSeed method. In addition to the seedColor, you can set other
colors. You can set the primary, onPrimary (the color drawn on top of
primary), secondary, and others. We will create a color scheme later in the
chapter. To learn more about ColorSchemes and create your own, visit
the Material 3 website: https://m3.material.io/styles/color/roles/color-
roles. There are two different types of color schemes: Static and dynamic.
Static just means you set the color once and do not change it. Dynamic is
when you want your screens to match a color from that screen.
Material Theme Builder
To help with dynamic colors, use the Material Theme Builder. The steps to
launch Material Theme Builder are as follows:
1. If you go to
https://www.figma.com/community/plugin/1034969338659738588/m
aterial-theme-builder, you can launch Figma’s Material Theme
Builder. This allows you to set your colors and text fonts. The screen
will be as follows:

--- Page 144 ---
Figure 5.2: Material Theme Builder
2. Click on the Open in… button, and you will see the following:

--- Page 145 ---
Figure 5.3: Color scheme
3. Click on the resources button, which is circled in red in Figure 5.3. This
will bring up the Material Theme Builder dialog. Here, you can choose a
color scheme in several different ways. If you select an image, it will
create a color scheme based on that image. Or you can select your
Primary colors, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 146 ---
Figure 5.4: Core colors
4. Selecting any of the color rows will bring up the color picker, as
follows:

--- Page 147 ---
Figure 5.5: Color picker
5. Change the Hue to set the color, and then adjust the Chroma and Tone
to get the exact color you want. To set a blue color, move the Chroma
to the right and adjust the Hue towards blue, as shown in the following
figure:

--- Page 148 ---
Figure 5.6: Blue color picker
6. Once you have finished, click Apply. You can then export the design to
Flutter by choosing the Export button as follows:

--- Page 149 ---
Figure 5.7: Exporting
7. This will download a material-theme.zip file. Unzip the file,
and you will find a lib directory with several files, as follows:
• util.dart: Creates the TextTheme.
• theme.dart: Creates some custom classes to store Figma’s scheme
colors.
• main.dart: Example usage of the theme.
While this is a nice tool for designing a color scheme, in this book, we will
create our theme by hand so you can see all the different options available.
Light vs dark

--- Page 150 ---
In main.dart, an interesting line of code, that gets the device’s brightness,
is as follows:
final brightness = 
View.of(context).platformDispatcher.platformBrightness;
You can then use a light or dark theme based on that brightness:
theme: brightness == Brightness.light ? theme.light() : theme.dark(),
This is a good way to change your theme based on the device's current
brightness level.
Note: That this does not listen for changes in the brightness and will not change until the app
is relaunched.
Creating a theme
The steps to create a theme are as follows:
1. Inside of theme.dart, create a new method using the following
command:
ThemeData createTheme() {
  return ThemeData(
  );
}
2. The movie app does not use many colors, but if you wanted to set a
color scheme, you would add it to the colorScheme parameter as
follows:
    colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
      seedColor: const Color(0xFF2196F3),
      // Base blue color
      primary: const Color(0xFF2196F3),
      // Primary color (can be same as seed)
      onPrimary: Colors.white,

--- Page 151 ---
      // Text/icon color on primary background
      secondary: const Color(0xFF90CAF9),
      // Secondary color (lighter blue)
      onSecondary: Colors.black,
      // Background color (very light blue)
      surfaceContainerHighest: Colors.black,
      // Text/icon color on background
      surface: const Color(0xFFBBDEFB),
      // Surface color (cards, menus, etc.)
      onSurface: Colors.black,
      // Text/icon color on surface
      error: const Color(0xFFB00020),
      // Error color (red)
      onError: Colors.white,
      // Text/icon color on error background
      brightness: Brightness.light, // Overall brightness (light or dark)
),
3. Here, we provide a seed color and a few other basic colors. Next, you
will define the textTheme using the variables you created earlier. Add
the following command:
    textTheme: 
Typography.material2021().englishLike.copyWith(
          headlineLarge: heading1,
          headlineMedium: heading2,
          headlineSmall: body2Regular,
          titleLarge: largeTitle,

--- Page 152 ---
          titleMedium: heading2,
          titleSmall: body2Bold,
          bodyLarge: body1Regular,
          bodyMedium: body2Regular,
          bodySmall: body3Regular,
          labelLarge: body1Bold,
          labelMedium: body2Bold,
          labelSmall: caption,
),
4. This starts by copying the Material 2021 theme (remember that Material
3 was introduced in 2021) and then adds all the styles we defined
earlier.
There are many more themes you can set. We will go over a few of the
common themes. The first one is for the AppBar. The AppBar is the title
section of an app. You can change the theme using the following:
    appBarTheme: const AppBarTheme(
      backgroundColor: Colors.white, // App bar background color
      foregroundColor: Colors.black, // Text/icon color on app bar
    ),
You can also set the elevation, shadow color, surface tint color, shape,
height, and many more. Next, set the theme for the bottom navigation bar.
Add the following code:
    bottomNavigationBarTheme: const BottomNavigationBarThemeData(
      backgroundColor: searchBarBackground,
      // Bottom nav background color
      selectedItemColor: Colors.white,
      // Selected item color

--- Page 153 ---
      unselectedLabelStyle: TextStyle(color: 
Colors.black),
      showUnselectedLabels: true,
      unselectedItemColor: posterBorder, // 
Unselected item color
    ),
Here, we set the background color to a dark color and set the selected color
to white. There are a few other themes you can set that are not needed for the
app, but you may find them useful in yours. There is a theme for the
snackbar. You can customize it with the SnackBarThemeData class. For
text buttons, there is the TextButtonThemeData, and for tab bars there
is TabBarTheme.
Now that you have your theme set up, it is time to add it to your app. Open
up main.dart and add the following:
      theme: createTheme(),
The code should be added after home: MainScreen().
iOS
So far, we have only talked about running the app on Android. Now, we will
try this on an iOS simulator. If you do not have a Mac, you can skip this
section and just continue to test on your device.
Xcode
The steps are as follows:
1. Open up Xcode. The first thing you want to do is make sure you have a
simulator. From the Window menu, select Devices and Simulators, as
shown in the following figure:

--- Page 154 ---
Figure 5.8: Window menu
2. You should see the following screen:

--- Page 155 ---
Figure 5.9: Simulators
3. Click on the plus button in the bottom left. Enter a name and select a
device. Press Create. The create screen is as follows:
Figure 5.10: Create simulator
4. You should now see the following screen:

--- Page 156 ---
Figure 5.11: Simulators
5. Next, open the Simulator tool, as shown in the following figure:


--- Page 157 ---
Figure 5.12: Simulator tool
6. The simulator will be generated as follows:
Figure 5.13: iOS simulator
7. In Android Studio, select the device drop-down and select Open iOS
Simulator, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 158 ---
Figure 5.14: Device picker
If everything is set up properly, your simulator should show up.
Press the green run button. You should now see the following:

--- Page 159 ---
Figure 5.15: App on iOS simulator
If you do not like that simulator, you can choose another. The steps to do so
are as follows:
1. In the simulator, select Open Simulator from the File menu, as shown
in the following figure:

--- Page 160 ---
Figure 5.16: Changing devices
2. Your simulator list may be different. Stop the current build in Android
Studio, select the new device, and run again.
Running on iOS can often have issues and being able to solve these issues is
important.
Open up Xcode and your project. You can find your project in the ios
folder, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 161 ---
Figure 5.17: Project chooser
Click on Open. This will open the Runner.xcodeproj file. Once the
project is open, select the Runner folder on the left, as selected in the
following figure:

--- Page 162 ---
Figure 5.18: Xcode project
Notice that the Minimum Deployments are set to 12. This is one of the
main areas for setting up your iOS or macOS app. Notice that the App
Category is set to None. You could set this to Entertainment for the movie
app. You can usually run everything from the Android Studio, but some
things are easier to see in Xcode. Explore the different tabs. Some are harder
to understand than others but luckily you do not need to change most of
them.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about what makes up the design of an app:
Colors and typography. You use those to create a theme throughout your app
for a consistent UI. You can also access tools like the Google Fonts page and
the Material Theme builder, which will help design your app.
In the next chapter, you will learn about state management, a key aspect of
building Flutter apps. You will also learn about some very nice packages for

--- Page 163 ---
handling state. The genre screen will also be created, completing your
second screen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 164 ---
CHAPTER 6
State Management Fundamentals
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn all about state management in Flutter. State
management is an important topic in Flutter and must be understood to
write Flutter apps properly. You will learn about the built-in state
management of Flutter as well as how to use third-party packages for
handling global states.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Understanding state in Flutter
• Local versus app state
• Built-in state
• State management with packages
• Immutable state
• Riverpod
• Genre screen
Objectives

--- Page 165 ---
This chapter will help you understand state and how to use it in Flutter. You
will learn about many different packages that help with state management
and will use the Riverpod package to set up state in the app. You will
know how to use Riverpod to provide data to other screens and you will
build out the genre screen. You will start using Riverpod to create your
first provider for the movie images. You will learn about saving selection
state when you use Flutter’s chip classes for genre selection.
Understanding state in Flutter
State is any data used in an app that can change over time and update the UI
of the app. In Flutter, the UI is designed to update whenever any state
changes. Remember that there are two types of widgets: Stateless and
stateful. Stateless widgets are given data to display but do not change
themselves, while stateful widgets contain their own state and can update it
to update the widget. Stateful widgets use the setState method to signal
the Flutter system that it needs to be redrawn. Use the setState method
as low as possible in the widget tree; otherwise, the whole screen will be
redrawn. In other words, if you have a widget in the middle of the screen, if
that widget is stateful, it can just redraw itself when its state changes. This
is also an example of why you want to put your widgets into their own
classes. This will allow the Flutter system to only draw those items that
have changed.
Local versus app state
Local state is data specific to a single widget and typically managed within
that widget's class. That class is a type of StatefulWidget. For
example, if you use a FilterChip widget, you will need to save the
selection state of the widget. This needs to be saved in a
StatefulWidget.
App state is data that is shared between multiple parts of your app, like user
preferences, authentication status, or shopping cart contents. Various state
management techniques are available for handling app state. We will use
the Riverpod package to allow the app-wide state to be shared among all
of the screens. If you have a networking package, you do not want to re-

--- Page 166 ---
create it on every screen. Using a package to create the library once and
share it among screens is very helpful.
Built-in State
If you look at MainApp in main.dart, you can see that it is made up of
a StatefulWidget and a state. The State class is where you will store
your data and build your UI. When the widget needs to be rebuilt, Flutter
will create a new widget but keep a copy of the state so that your data is not
lost. The State class has a widget parameter that lets you access its parent
widget. It also keeps track of its lifecycle. The state class has a few
important methods: initState (called once to initialize data), destroy
(free up resources when done), setState (notify the system that the
widget needs to be rebuilt), and build (return a widget to display).
InheritedWidget
InheritedWidget is a Flutter widget that passes state down the widget
tree without sending it through parameters. It stores the state in the
BuildContext. Typical subclasses of this class have a static of method,
that when passed in a context, will return that value. The following is an
example of a widget that implements the InheritedWidget method:
static InheritedWidgetSubclass of(BuildContext context) {
  final result =
      context.dependOnInheritedWidgetOfExactType< 
InheritedWidgetSubclass >();
  return result!;
}
The dependOnInheritedWidgetOfExactType method retrieves
the stored value. This widget is not used much.
State management with packages
In Flutter, you can just use stateful widgets to manage the state, but there
are many packages out there that provide a lot of functionality. The

--- Page 167 ---
following are a few that will be covered:
• Provider
• Riverpod
• Business Logic Component (BLoC)
• GetIt
• Redux
• MobX
Why would you want to use another package? If you have data that you
want to share among all the widgets below the main widget, you would
normally have to pass that data down the tree via parameters. This is known
as lifting the state. A design pattern for moving the ownership of state as
high as possible. This can be difficult if you have more than one parameter.
These packages provide a way to set data in one location and retrieve it
anywhere in a widget tree. No more parameters.
Provider
Provider is a third-party package from Google but is in maintenance
mode. It was originally developed by the author of Riverpod (who
recommends using Riverpod). It is described as a wrapper around
InheritedWidget. InheritedWidget is a Flutter widget that is
useful for allowing child widgets to access state that has been defined
higher up, without passing that state down via parameters. It uses the
BuildContext dependOnInheritedWidgetOfExactType
method to find instances. The Provider package has several classes that
provide classes that can be used by widgets lower down in the tree. The
basic class is the Provider class. This class has a create parameter
where you would create your class once and a child parameter for your
child widget. An example is:
Provider(
  create: (_) => MyModel(),
  child: ...
)

--- Page 168 ---
This creates the MyModel class once and returns a widget in the child
parameter.
Another provider is called ChangeNotifierProvider and is useful
for updating the widget when its value changes. This class has a value
parameter instead of a create parameter. It uses the built-in Flutter
ChangeNotifier class. An example would be:
class Counter extends ChangeNotifier {
  int _counter = 0;
  int get counter => _counter;
  void increment() {
    _counter++;
    notifyListeners();
  }
  void decrement() {
    _counter--;
    notifyListeners();
  }
}
This takes the sample Flutter apps counter variable and puts it in a class
that holds that state. Whenever the increment or decrement methods
are called, the counter gets modified and listeners are notified of the
change. You would use the ChangeNotifierProvider as follows:
ChangeNotifierProvider(
      create: (context) => Counter(),
      child: const MyApp(),
    ),
If you have multiple providers, the provider has the MultiProvider
widget, which takes an array of providers.

--- Page 169 ---
BloC
BLoC is a package designed to make it easy to implement this design
pattern. The idea behind this pattern is to separate the UI from the business
logic. The UI takes actions from a user that are sent to a cubit (a class
that stores state). This cubit takes that action, converts it to a new state,
and then sends that state out for the UI to consume. BloC is a nice pattern
but requires a lot of code to implement. You can find more information
about BloC at https://pub.dev/packages/bloc.
GetIt
GetIt is a service locator package (that is, dependency injection). While
GetIt is not a state management solution, it provides dependency
injection functionality like other packages. You would use it as follows:
final getIt = GetIt.instance;
getIt.registerSingleton<AppModel>(AppModel());
Then, to use it in the UI, apply the following code:
MaterialButton(
  child: Text("Update"),
  onPressed: getIt<AppModel>().update   // given 
that your AppModel has a method update
),
You can find GetIt at https://pub.dev/packages/get_it.
Redux
Redux comes in two packages: Redux for Dart and flutter_redux for
Flutter (that uses Redux).
Redux has three principles:
• Single source of truth: Your state is stored in an object tree in one
place.
• State is read-only: State objects are immutable and can only be

--- Page 170 ---
changed by actions that create a new state.
• Changes are made with pure reducers: These functions take a state
and an action and produce a new state.
In the flutter_redux package, there is a StoreProvider that takes
a store you have created and a child widget. There is a
StoreConnector that provides a converter function and a builder
that has a callback. That callback will dispatch an action to the store. The
flow is as follows:
Figure 6.1: Redux data flow
MobX
MobX is a state management library that uses the concepts of observables,
actions, and reactions. It is like Redux. Actions are like the reducer, and
observable is where you store your data. It has a code generator that can
create some of the boilerplate code for you. You can find MobX at
https://pub.dev/packages/mobx. You would mark a value with the
@observable annotation and an action with @action on a function. A
class would use the store mixin, and the generator would create the store

--- Page 171 ---
class needed in your widget tree. You can use the Observer widget to
listen to changes in your store.
Immutable state
Many libraries talk about the importance of immutability. The reason is that
if you have state that can be changed by any class, you will eventually
encounter bugs where one class changes the state and another class has a
different instance of that state. Which one is correct? Will different parts of
your app behave differently, or will it just crash? One of the downsides of a
class that cannot have its data changed is that you have to create a new copy
each time to update its state. There is a library that helps with that, and we
will cover that library in a later chapter.
Riverpod
Riverpod is another third-party package written by the same author as
Provider. Riverpod is an anagram of provider. The author has learned
from his experience with the provider and has created an excellent package.
You can find more information about Riverpod at https://riverpod.dev/.
We will be using this package for the movies app. It is like Provider but
also has a generator so that you can use its annotation capabilities to
generate code. Riverpod has several custom widgets that you will
subclass to give you access to the provided data. These classes provide easy
access to all the shared resources you have created. Another advantage is
that you do not have to define your resources in the same file as your UI.
Riverpod also handles asynchronous requests and can cache the result.
Riverpod is defined as a reactive caching framework for Flutter/Dart. It
can handle asynchronous calling with error handling. Riverpod uses
reference classes that allow you to listen for changes in data. The main
reference class is WidgetRef. This class has several important methods:
• watch(provider): Given a provider, update the widget when the
provider changes.
• listen(provider): Listen to changes in a provider and perform an action.
• read(provider): Used to get the value of the provider and not listen to
changes.

--- Page 172 ---
Both the watch and listen methods should be used inside of the build
method. Read is usually used for other methods when you need to get the
value of the provider and perform some action.
We will use the Riverpod package for dependency injection and, in part,
for state management. To add Riverpod, you need to add several
packages. Open pubspec.yaml and add the following:
  flutter_riverpod: ^2.5.1
  # the annotation package containing @riverpod
  riverpod_annotation: ^2.3.5
Next, add two packages under the dev_depenencies 
section:
  build_runner: ^2.4.8
  riverpod_generator: ^2.4.0
  riverpod_lint: ^2.3.5
Comment out the overrides:
#dependency_overrides:
#  analyzer: 5.13.0
Click on Pub get.
Here are what the packages are for:
• flutter_riverpod: Main Riverpod package.
• riverpod_annotation: Provides annotation used by the code generator.
• build_runner: This is a Flutter package used by other packages to
create source code for you. Riverpod generator uses this to create
Riverpod files.
• riverpod_generator: Package used to generate Riverpod code.
• riverpod_lint: Linter that checks for Riverpod issues.
In order to use Riverpod, you will need to wrap the MainApp in a
ProviderScope. The ProviderScope stores the state of all
providers. Open up main.dart and change runApp to:

--- Page 173 ---
  runApp(const ProviderScope(child: MainApp()));
Then, import the Riverpod package. To use Riverpod, you need to
define some providers. Inside the lib directory, create a new file named
providers.dart. We will be moving the images list into the
providers.dart file. Add:
import 
'package:riverpod_annotation/riverpod_annotation.d
art';
part 'providers.g.dart';
@riverpod
List<String> movieImages(MovieImagesRef ref) => [
// TODO add Images
];
This imports the riverpod_anotation file and uses the part keyword.
This keyword will import the providers.g.dart file. This does not
exist yet and will be generated by Riverpod. Next replace the TODO
with:
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/z1p34vh7dEOnLDmyCr
lUVLuoDzd.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/gKkl37BQuKTanygYQG
1pyYgLVgf.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/4xJd3uwtL1vCuZgEfE
c8JXI9Uyx.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/uuA01PTtPombRPvL9d

--- Page 174 ---
vsBqOBJWm.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/H6vke7zGiuLsz4v4RP
eReb9rsv.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/e1J2oNzSBdou01sUvr
iVuoYp0pJ.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/hu40Uxp9WtpL34jv3z
yWLb5zEVY.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/pKaA8VvfkNfEMUPMii
uL5qSPQYy.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/zK2sFxZcelHJRPVr24
2rxy5VK4T.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/7qxG0zyt29BI0IzFDf
sps62kbQi.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/8Gxv8gSFCU0XGDykEG
v7zR1n2ua.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/zDi2U7WYkdIoGYHcYb
M9X5yReVD.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/cxevDYdeFkiixRShbO
bdwAHBZry.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/uXUs1fwSuE06LgYETw
2mi4JxQvc.jpg',

--- Page 175 ---
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/fdZpvODTX5wwkD0ikZ
NaClE4AoW.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/d5NXSklXo0qyIYkgV9
4XAgMIckC.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/sh7Rg8Er3tFcN9BpKI
POMvALgZd.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/sHJ2OIgpcpSmhqXkuS
WxZ3nwg1S.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/upKD8UbH8vQ798aMWg
wMxV8t4yk.jpg',
  
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/vfrQk5IPloGg1v9Rzb
h2Eg3VGyM.jpg',
This is the list of all movie images. Now remove the list from
home_screen_image.dart. In order to generate the
providers.g.dart file, you will use Flutter’s build_runner app.
Open the terminal in Android Studio and run:
dart run build_runner build
Your output will look like this:

--- Page 176 ---
Figure 6.2: build_runner
Now that the provider file is ready, it is time to fix the errors that show up.
Inside of home_screen_image.dart, add the flutter_riverpod import:
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
and then change the type of HomeScreenImage to ConsumerWidget.
This is a Riverpod stateless widget. Next change the build method to:
  Widget build(BuildContext context, WidgetRef ref) {
This adds the WidgetRef parameter. Right after this add:
    final images = ref.watch(movieImagesProvider);
This uses the WidgetRef to read the provider created by Riverpod and
return the list of movie strings. Do the same thing with the home screen and
VerticalMovieList. You should not see any errors. Hot reload and
make sure everything works.

--- Page 177 ---
Genre screen
It is time to create the Genre screen. This screen will allow users to search
for a movie by genre or title. Here is the design of the screen:

--- Page 178 ---
Figure 6.3: Genre design

--- Page 179 ---
Start by creating a new folder in the ui/screens directory, named
genres. Inside that folder, create a new dart file named
genre_screen.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 
'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
class GenreScreen extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  const GenreScreen({super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<GenreScreen> createState() => 
_GenreScreenState();
}
class _GenreScreenState extends 
ConsumerState<GenreScreen> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Placeholder();
  }
}
Notice that this class uses a new ConsumerStatefulWidget class
from the Riverpod package. This widget gives us access to provider
references that allow us to retrieve our shared classes.
_GenreScreenState extends ConsumerState, which is another
Riverpod class. Open the main_screen and replace the second
placeholder with the GenreScreen. Now run the app and click on the
Genre screen. It will look the same, but you can now work on it while it
shows the following:

--- Page 180 ---
Figure 6.4: Genre screen
Inside of GenreScreen, replace the Placerholder() with the
following:
// 1
SafeArea(
      // 2
      child: Container(
        color: screenBackground,
        // 3
        child: Column(
            mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,

--- Page 181 ---
            mainAxisAlignment: 
MainAxisAlignment.start,
            crossAxisAlignment: 
CrossAxisAlignment.start,
            children: [
              // 4
              Row(
                mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,
                children: [
                  Padding(
                    padding: const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(16, 16.0, 0.0, 24.0),
                    child: Text('Find a Movie',
                        style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.titleLarge),
                  ),
                ],
              ),
            ]),
      ),
    );
Here is an explanation of the code:
1. Use SafeArea to draw below the status area.
2. Use a Container to show our background color.
3. Use a Column set at max height to show a list of items.
4. Use a Row to display items across the screen.
As we build this screen, we will create code that will change later as we add
more items. Hot reload (or hot restart if that does not work), and you should

--- Page 182 ---
see the following:
Figure 6.5: Genre with title
This is a good way to build a screen. Slowly add one item at a time to make
sure it works by performing a hot reload. If you try to build the whole thing
at once and it does not work, you cannot be sure what is causing the
problem.
Next, we need a search text field. Add a new file called
genre_search_row.dart in the genres folder. Start with the
following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 
'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';

--- Page 183 ---
typedef OnSearch = void Function(String 
searchString);
class GenreSearchRow extends 
ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  final OnSearch onSearch;
  const GenreSearchRow(this.onSearch, 
{super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<GenreSearchRow> createState() => 
_GenreSearchRowState();
}
class _GenreSearchRowState extends 
ConsumerState<GenreSearchRow> {
  // TODO: Add variables
  // TODO Add init and dispose
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Row(mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max, 
children: [
       // TODO: Add TextField
    ]);
  }
}
The only unique item here is the OnSearch typedef. This defines a
function that will receive a searchString.
1. When the user clicks on the search icon or hits the done button on the
keyboard, a searchString will be sent to the owner of the
onSearch function. Replace the first TODO with the following:

--- Page 184 ---
  late TextEditingController movieTextController;
  final FocusNode textFocusNode = FocusNode();
This creates a TextEditingController for controlling the text
the user inputs.
2. The FocusNode is an easy way for the user to start typing in the text
field. Next, create the initState and dispose methods. These are
needed as a one-time initialization and disposal. Replace the second
TODO with the following:
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
    movieTextController = TextEditingController(text: '');
  }
  @override
  void dispose() {
    movieTextController.dispose();
    super.dispose();
}
Whenever you use a text controller, you need to dispose of it in the
dispose method.
3. The TextField widget has a lot of options, and this one will use
lots, so we will add them slowly. Replace // TODO: Add
TextField with:
      Expanded(
        child: Padding(
          padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0, right: 16.0),
          child: TextField(
            style: const TextStyle(color: Colors.white),

--- Page 185 ---
            focusNode: textFocusNode,
            keyboardType: TextInputType.text,
            // TODO Add More
          ),
        ),
)
This just wraps the TextField with some padding and by using the
Expanded widget, fill the row. The input type is text.
4. Replace the TODO with the following code:
              enableSuggestions: false,
              autofocus: false,
// 1           
              onSubmitted: (value) {
                widget.onSearch(value);
              },
// 2
              controller: movieTextController,
              autocorrect: false,
// 3
              decoration: InputDecoration(
                filled: true,
                focusColor: searchBarBackground,
                focusedBorder: null,
                enabledBorder: null,
                fillColor: searchBarBackground,
                border: OutlineInputBorder(

--- Page 186 ---
                  borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(20),
                  borderSide: BorderSide.none,
                ),
                hintText: 'movie name, genre',
                hintStyle: body1Regular.copyWith(color: posterBorder),
// 4
                suffixIcon: IconButton(
                  onPressed: () {
                    movieTextController.clear();
                  },
                  icon: const Icon(Icons.close, color: Colors.white,), // Close 
icon
                ),
// 5
                prefixIcon: IconButton(
                  icon: const Icon(Icons.search, color: Colors.white,),
                  onPressed: () {
                    widget.onSearch(movieTextController.text);
                  },
                ),
),
5. The steps are as follows:
a. When the user hits the return key, call the onSearch method with
the current search text.
b. Use the text controller we created earlier.
c. Create an InputDecoration that creates a nice rounded
rectangle around the text field.

--- Page 187 ---
d. Create a clear icon at the end so that the text can be reset.
e. Create a search icon that will call the onSearch method.
6. Back in genre_screen.dart, add the following after the row:
              GenreSearchRow((searchString) {
}),
Perform a hot reload. You should see the following screen:
Figure 6.6: Search Field
Genre section
Now, we will examine one of the most complicated, but exciting sections.
This section will show a list of genres for the user to choose when they
search. Start by adding a new package named auto_size_text. This
package will expand and shrink text to fit better on the screen.

--- Page 188 ---
The steps to add the package are as follows:
1. Open pubspec.yaml and add the following code:
  auto_size_text: ^3.0.0
2. Click on Pub get. Create a new file named genre_section.dart
in the genres folder. Add the following code:
import 'package:auto_size_text/auto_size_text.dart';
import 'package:collection/collection.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
// 1
class GenreState {
  final String genre;
  final bool isSelected;
  GenreState({required this.genre, required this.isSelected});
}
// 2
typedef OnGenresSelected = void Function(List<GenreState>);
typedef OnGenresExpanded = void Function(bool);
// 3
class GenreSection extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  final bool isExpanded;
  final List<GenreState> genreStates;
  final OnGenresExpanded onGenresExpanded;
  final OnGenresSelected onGenresSelected;
  const GenreSection(

--- Page 189 ---
      {required this.genreStates,
        required this.isExpanded,
        required this.onGenresExpanded,
        required this.onGenresSelected,
        super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<GenreSection> createState() => 
_GenreSectionState();
}
class _GenreSectionState extends ConsumerState<GenreSection> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Placeholder();
  }
}
a. GenreState is a class that holds the name of the genre and
whether it is selected.
b. These two functions are for when the genre is selected and the
section is expanded.
c. GenreSection is the widget. It is passed in the fields needed to
display itself.
3. Now add the following method below build:
  List<Widget> getGenreChips() {
    return widget.genreStates.mapIndexed((index, element) {
      final genreState = widget.genreStates[index];
      return FilterChip(
        backgroundColor: searchBarBackground,

--- Page 190 ---
        selectedColor: buttonGrey,
        label: AutoSizeText(genreState.genre,
            style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelSmall),
        selected: widget.genreStates[index].isSelected,
        onSelected: (selected) {
          setState(
                () {
              widget.genreStates[index] = GenreState(
                  genre: genreState.genre,
                  isSelected: !widget.genreStates[index].isSelected);
              widget.onGenresSelected(getSelectedGenres());
            },
          );
        },
      );
    }).toList();
}
4. This method will return a list of FilterChip (a Flutter widget).
FilterChip has checkmarks next to them if they are selected. Next,
add the following:
  List<GenreState> getSelectedGenres() {
    return widget.genreStates.where((e) => e.isSelected).toList();
  }
  int totalSelected() {
    return getSelectedGenres().length;
}

--- Page 191 ---
The first method will return a list of genres that have been selected.
The last method just returns a total of the selected genres.
5. Now replace the Placeholder widget with:
    final genreChips = getGenreChips();
    return ExpansionPanelList(
      expandIconColor: Colors.white,
      expansionCallback: (int index, bool expanded) {
        setState(() {
          widget.onGenresExpanded(expanded);
        });
      },
      children: [
        ExpansionPanel(
          isExpanded: widget.isExpanded,
          backgroundColor: screenBackground,
          headerBuilder: (BuildContext context, bool isExpanded) {
// TODO Add Chips
        )
      ],
);
This code will call the getGenreChips method to get a list of chips.
The ExpansionPanelList widget will expand and contract when
the user selects an arrow. The expansionCallback will be called,
and we will call onGenresExpanded with the value to have the
section updated.
6. The ExpansionPanel is where the chips will live. Replace the
TODO with:

--- Page 192 ---
            return Padding(
              padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0, top: 16),
              child: Row(
                children: [
// 1          
                  Text('Genres',
                      style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.headlineLarge),
                  const SizedBox(width: 8),
// 2
                  Container(
                    width: 16,
                    height: 16,
                    decoration: const BoxDecoration(
                      shape: BoxShape.circle,
                      color: Colors.red,
                    ),
                    child: Center(
                      // Center the text
                      child: Text(
                        totalSelected().toString(),
                        style: verySmallText,
                      ),
                    ),
                  )
                ],

--- Page 193 ---
              ),
            );
          },
          body: Padding(
            padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0, right: 16),
            child: Row(
              mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.spaceBetween,
// 3
              children: genreChips,
            )
),
This will show the list of Genre chips that the user can select to choose
which genres they are interested in.
1. Genre title: Create the Title for the screen.
2. A small red circle with a number of selected genres. This will be
the count of selected genres.
3. Chips. This is the list of chips to display.
7. Back in GenreScreen, add the following after the genres list:
  final expandedNotifier = ValueNotifier<bool>(false);
8. After GenreSearchRow add:
              ValueListenableBuilder<bool>(
                  valueListenable: expandedNotifier,
                  builder: (BuildContext context, bool value, Widget? child) {
                    return GenreSection(
                      genreStates: genres,
                      isExpanded: value,
                      onGenresExpanded: (expanded) {

--- Page 194 ---
                        expandedNotifier.value = expanded;
                      },
                      onGenresSelected: (List<GenreState> states) {},
                    );
}),
9. ValueListenableBuilder is another Flutter widget that will
rebuild just its child when its value changes. This will change when the
user expands the Genres section. Do a hot restart (not reload). You
should see the following screen:
Figure 6.7: Genres section

--- Page 195 ---
Sorting
The next item is a divider and a sort drop-down. The steps to add it are as
follows:
1. Inside of GenreScreen, add a divider after the
ValueListenableBuilder:
              const Divider(),
2. Create a new folder under the lib folder named utils. Add a new
file named utils.dart then add the following code:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
Widget addVerticalSpace(double amount) {
  return SizedBox(height: amount);
}
Widget addHorizontalSpace(double amount) {
  return SizedBox(width: amount);
}
enum Sorting {
  aToz(name: 'A-Z'),
  zToa(name: 'Z-A'),
  rating(name: 'Rating'),
  year(name: 'Year');
  const Sorting({required this.name});
  final String name;
}
This adds two methods that just return a SizedBox. This is a helper
method. The sorting enum will display its name in a drop-down.
3. Now add a new file named sort_picker.dart in then genres
folder. Add the following:

--- Page 196 ---
import 'package:collection/collection.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
typedef OnSortSelected = void Function(Sorting);
class SortPicker extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  final OnSortSelected onSortSelected;
  const SortPicker({required this.onSortSelected, super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<SortPicker> createState() => _SortPickerState();
}
class _SortPickerState extends ConsumerState<SortPicker> {
  Sorting selectedSort = Sorting.aToz;
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Placeholder();
  }
}
The OnSortSelected typedef is used to return to the caller the user
selected sort value. This sets up the SortPicker class and has a variable
for managing the selected sort. Now replace Placeholder with:
    return Row(
      children: [
        const Spacer(),
        Text(
          selectedSort.name,

--- Page 197 ---
          style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelLarge,
        ),
// 1
        addHorizontalSpace(16),
// 2
        PopupMenuButton<Sorting>(
          icon: const Icon(
            Icons.arrow_drop_down,
            color: Colors.white ,
          ),
// 3
          onSelected: (Sorting value) {
            widget.onSortSelected(value);
          },
          itemBuilder: (BuildContext context) {
// 4
            return Sorting.values
                
.mapIndexed<PopupMenuItem<Sorting>>((int index, 
Sorting sort) {
// 5
              return CheckedPopupMenuItem<Sorting>
(
                checked: selectedSort == sort,
                value: sort,

--- Page 198 ---
                onTap: () {
                  setState(() {
                    selectedSort = sort;
                  });
                },
                child: Text(sort.name),
              );
            }).toList();
          },
        ),
      ],
    );
1. addHorizontalSpace is a utility method for adding a bit of space.
2. PopupMenuButton is a Flutter widget for showing a popup menu.
3. When an item is selected, call the callback.
4. Use the mapIndexed collection method to return a widget for each
sorting item.
a. CheckedPopupMenuItem is another Flutter widget that has a
checkbox when selected.
mapIndexed is a collection method that is a helpful way to iterate over
all items in a list and provide an index. By going through the Sorting
enum values, we create a checked popup for each item. When the user
selects a sorting popup menu, the selected sort is set and the widget is
rebuilt. Note that you need to call toList on mapIndexed in order for
this to work.
1. Hot restart. The screen will be as follows:

--- Page 199 ---
Figure 6.8: Sort picker
Movie list
Now, we will add the section for the list of movies shown after a search.
Note that we will not be using live data until the networking chapter. The
movie list will be a widget that can be reused. For reusable widgets, create a
widgets folder under the lib/ui folder. Then, create a new file named
movie_row.dart. This class will display a row with a movie image,
title, and release date (The title and release date will be added when we
have actual movie data in later chapters).
The steps are as follows:
1. Add the following code:
import 'package:auto_size_text/auto_size_text.dart';
import 'package:cached_network_image/cached_network_image.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';

--- Page 200 ---
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
class MovieRow extends StatelessWidget {
  final String movie;
  const MovieRow({super.key, required this.movie});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // TODO
  }
}
We will use the AutoSizeText widget to have long titles fit properly. 
Now replace TODO with:
    if (movie.isNotEmpty) {
// 1 
      return GestureDetector(
        onTap: () => {},
        child: Padding(
          padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
          child: SizedBox(
            height: 140,
// 2
            child: Row(
              mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,
              children: [
                addHorizontalSpace(16),
// 3
                SizedBox(

--- Page 201 ---
                  height: 142,
                  width: 100,
// 4
                  child: CachedNetworkImage(
                    imageUrl: movie,
                    alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                    fit: BoxFit.cover,
                    height: 142,
                    width: 100,
                  ),
                ),
                addHorizontalSpace(16),
// 5
                Column(
                  mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                  mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.end,
                  crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                  children: [
                    const Spacer(),
// 6
                    AutoSizeText(
                      'Title',
                      maxLines: 1,
                      minFontSize: 10,
                      style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelLarge,

--- Page 202 ---
                      overflow: TextOverflow.ellipsis,
                    ),
                    addVerticalSpace(4),
                    Text(
                      '1979',
                      style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium,
                    ),
                    addVerticalSpace(4),
                  ],
                ),
              ],
            ),
          ),
        ),
      );
    } else {
      return Container();
    }
}
a. Use a GestureDetector for taps on the full row.
b. Create a row that takes up the full width.
c. Create a box of a fixed size.
d. Use CachedNetworkImage to display the image.
e. Use a Column for the title and release date.
f. Use AutoSizeText to fit the text.
2. Now, create vert_movie_list.dart in the widgets folder. For

--- Page 203 ---
now, this file will only show a few movies, as anything more will cause
errors. These errors will be addressed in the next chapter with more
advanced widgets. Add the following code:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
import '../ui/screens/home/home_screen_image.dart';
import 'movie_row.dart';
typedef OnMovieTap = void Function(int movieId);
class VerticalMovieList extends StatelessWidget {
  final List<String> movies;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  const VerticalMovieList({
    super.key,
    required this.movies,
    required this.onMovieTap,
  });
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Column(
      children: [
        MovieRow(
          movie: images[0],
        ),
        addVerticalSpace(10),
        MovieRow(
          movie: images[1],

--- Page 204 ---
        ),
      ],
    );
  }
}
3. The OnMovieTap typedef is used to notify the caller that the user
tapped on this movie item. This just shows two images from our list of
URLs. Now add the following in GenreScreen after SortPicker:
VerticalMovieList(movies: [], onMovieTap:
(movieId) {},),
4. For now, we are just passing in an empty list of movies as the
VerticalMovieList class just has two hard-coded strings.
Perform a hot reload. The screen would be as follows:

--- Page 205 ---
Figure 6.9: Vertical images
While this uses fixed data, later chapters will use live data from the internet.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about state management and some of the great
packages available for helping maintain your state. You should understand
local and app states and how the built-in state handling works. You should
also understand the importance of an immutable state. You have built up the

--- Page 206 ---
genre screen and learned more about some of the hidden widgets like
ValueListenableBuilder, PopupMenuButton, and CheckedPopupMenuItem.
In the next chapter, you will learn some of the more advanced widgets that
will overcome the limitations of row and column, like ListView and
GridView which open up new possibilities for displaying information.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 207 ---
CHAPTER 7
Advanced Widgets
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about advanced Flutter widgets and how to use
them in your movie app. This will allow you to show more information on
the screen as well as show that data in different ways. These are essential
widgets that are used in Flutter apps. Widgets for showing large numbers of
other widgets are critical for most apps.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• ListView
• Expanded
• Stack
• IndexedStack
• LayoutBuilder
• GridView
• Table
• Card
• BottomSheets
• Slivers

--- Page 208 ---
• Movie trailers
Objectives
You will learn about the more advanced widgets that Flutter provides. These
widgets require more setup but can do some amazing things. As you learn
about these widgets, you will build out the movie app with them. By the end
of the chapter, you will know how to show horizontal and vertical lists of
data, grids of data, and how to stack widgets. You will also have a solid
understanding of slivers.
ListView
In the last chapter, you used a column to display some movie titles. If your
screen was a bit smaller or you added one more item, you would have seen a
striped line with the message about overflow. This happens when your
widget overflows the area it can draw. To avoid that problem, you need a
widget that can scroll. ListView is one of the main widgets that are used
to display a list of items either horizontally or vertically. You will use the
same class and just change the orientation field if you want to show them
horizontally. ListView has several different constructors you can use to
display your list, as follows:
• ListView: Default constructor. Uses a children parameter for a fixed list
of widgets.
• ListView.builder: Uses two key fields itemCount (number of items)
and itemBuilder (used to return an item for a specific index).
• ListView.separated: Like a builder but puts dividers between each row.
• ListView.custom: Uses a childrenDelegate that is like a builder,
returning items for a given index. Delegates provide a lot more power
than just using a builder.
You will probably use either the builder or the separated constructors the
most. They are flexible and easy to use.
All these methods take a ScrollController as a parameter. You do not
have to pass one in, but if you do not, one will be created for you. A scroll
controller will allow you to jump or animate to a specific position in the list.

--- Page 209 ---
Vertical lists are the default. If you want a horizontal list, you will pass the
following:
scrollDirection: Axis.horizontal
The builder and separated constructors take a builder parameter that looks as
follows:
builder: (BuildContext context, int index) {}
Here, the index is the index value in your list of items to show. To see how
ListView works, we will convert the VerticalMovieList Column to
use a ListView that can handle a scrolling list of movies. Open
vert_movie_list.dart and replace the column in the build method
with the following:
    return ListView.builder(
      itemCount: movies.length,
      itemBuilder: (context, index) {
        return MovieRow(
          movie: movies[index],
        );
      },
    );
Now, return to genre_screen.dart and update the call to:
   VerticalMovieList(movies: images, onMovieTap: (movieId) {},),
This will send the whole list of movies to the widget. Hot reload. You will
probably see a white screen with lots of errors in the console. You will see
the following error message a lot:
Vertical viewport was given unbounded height.
This means that one or several widgets do not give a fixed height and try to
take up an infinite height, which causes this error. How do we solve this? We
will use the Expanded widget.
Expanded

--- Page 210 ---
The Expanded widget tries to take up as much width or height as its row or
column will allow. Expanded only works in these two widgets. Wrap the
ListView call in an Expanded and hot reload. The following code uses
an Expanded widget to fill the column and then a ListView with the list
of movies:
    return Expanded(
      child: ListView.builder(
        itemCount: movies.length,
        itemBuilder: (context, index) {
          return MovieRow(
            movie: movies[index],
          );
        },
      ),
    );
Here is what we have so far. Notice that you can scroll the list of movies, as
shown in the following figure:

--- Page 211 ---
Figure 7.1: ListView
Now, open horiz_movies.dart. In Chapter 4, Basic Widgets (Adding a
movie row), you added a ListView to this class. Here, you can see that it
is a horizontal list and uses the movies list passed in. The code for this is as
follows:
// 1

--- Page 212 ---
SizedBox(
      height: 142,
      child: ListView.builder(
// 2
          scrollDirection: Axis.horizontal,
// 3
          itemCount: movies.length,
// 4
          itemBuilder: (context, index) {
            return GestureDetector(
              onTap: () {},
              child: SizedBox(
                width: 100,
                height: 142,
                child: CachedNetworkImage(
                  imageUrl: movies[index],
                  alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                  fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                  height: 100,
                  width: 142,
                ),
              ),
            );
          }),
    );
The description of the code is as follows:
1. This shows a horizontal list of movies at a fixed height of 142 pixels.

--- Page 213 ---
2. Make this a horizontal list.
3. Set the item count to the number of movies.
4. Use the itemBuilder to return a 100x142 movie image.
Stack
A Stack widget displays its children, with the first one in the list displayed
at the bottom. The advantage of this widget is you can use the
Positioned widget to place items on top of each other or on different
sides of the stack’s box. The Positioned widget takes the top, left,
bottom, and right position parameters. These are pixels from the top and left.
You can also use the Align widget, which has an alignment parameter that
can be topCenter, topLeft, topRight, centerXXX, and
bottomXXX. The detail page will use the stack to show text on top of an
image. A Stack with an image would be created by using the following code:
Stack(children: [
    Align(
       alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
       child: CachedNetworkImage(
                imageUrl: imageUrl,
                alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                fit: BoxFit.fitWidth,
                height: 200,
               width: screenWidth,
            ),
          ),
 ]),
This will show an image in the top center of the stack. If you add additional
images or text, they will lay on top of this image. This is useful for our detail
page, where we want to display the movie details above the image.

--- Page 214 ---
IndexedStack
A IndexedStack widget is like a stack but displays only one child at a
time. It is useful as a paging widget that allows the user to display different
pages when they click on a controlling widget. It would look as follows:
IndexedStack(
                    index: _selectedIndex,
                    children: [widget1, widget2, widget3],
                  )
Another widget would change _selectedIndex to have the stack
change.
LayoutBuilder
If you ever need to know how big an area is to draw in, then
LayoutBuilder is a great widget. It uses a builder parameter that passes
in a BoxConstraints. Then, based on the constraints of min and max,
width, and height, you decide whether to show different layouts or just size a
widget to the max width or height. This is perfect for when you have a fixed
size and want to put an image inside. Just use a SizedBox with the
constraints, max width, or height. These constraints are the parent's
constraints and are useful if you need to do any custom layouts. You could
use one layout for tablets and another for phones using the maxWidth field.
The following is a small example:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp(
      debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
      home: Scaffold(
        body: Center(
          child: LayoutBuilder(builder: (context, constraints) {
            if (constraints.maxWidth > 600) {
              return Row(children: [Text('Wide Screen')]);
            } else {
              return Column(children: [Text('Narrow Screen')]);
            }

--- Page 215 ---
          }),
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
You can see that we check the maxWidth, and if it is greater than 600
(which usually signifies a tablet), we show a different layout than if it is
smaller than 600 (like on a phone).
GridView
GridView takes lists to the next level. They allow you to display items
both horizontally and vertically. There are also ways to display a fixed set of
columns or to even stagger mixed widths and heights. Grids work a bit
differently in that they take a delegate, which is of type
SliverGridDelegate (Slivers will be talked about in upcoming
sections), and describe how the rows and columns will be set. Like list
views, grids have several constructors, as follows:
• GridView: Default constructor.
• GridView.builder: Use a builder to return a widget.
• GridView.count: Display items with a fixed count of cross-axis items.
• GridView.extend: Each item has a maximum cross-axis size.
• GridView.custom: Roll your own Grid. There are no defaults; you must
provide all parameters.
Open up genre_section.dart and scroll to the last row. Here, we just
showed a list of about four chips. To display more, we will be using a
GridView. Replace the Row with the following:
child: GridView.builder(
                    shrinkWrap: true,
// 1
                    itemCount: genreChips.length,
// 2

--- Page 216 ---
                    gridDelegate:
// 3
                        const 
SliverGridDelegateWithMaxCrossAxisExtent(
                            maxCrossAxisExtent: 
100,
                            crossAxisSpacing: 16,
                            childAspectRatio: 1.5,
                            mainAxisSpacing: 0),
// 4
                    itemBuilder: (BuildContext 
context, int index) {
                      return genreChips[index];
                    },
                  ),
This uses the builder constructor with several parameters, as follows:
1. itemCount is the total number of items.
2. gridDelegate describes how the grid will be laid out.
3. This delegate lays out its children with a width of 100, 16 pixels of
vertical space, and an aspect ratio of 1.5 (set the cross-axis height as a
ratio of the width).
4. Return an item at the given index.
Back in genre_screen.dart, update the list of genres to include the
full list, as follows:
      GenreState(genre: 'Action', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Adventure', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Crime', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Mystery', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'War', isSelected: false),

--- Page 217 ---
      GenreState(genre: 'Comedy', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Romance', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'History', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Music', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Drama', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Thriller', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Family', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Horror', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Western', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Science Fiction', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Animation', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Documentation', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'TV Movie', isSelected: false),
      GenreState(genre: 'Fantasy', isSelected: false),
Do a hot restart as a reload will not re-run the initState method. The
following figure shows a grid of columns and rows:

--- Page 218 ---
Figure 7.2: GridView
As you can see, there are four columns and five rows. If the screen changes
sizes (like on the web), it will expand to fill the area.
Table
Tables are great for data that needs to be displayed in columns and rows. You
can set each column width, and have a border. A Table's children are a
list of TableRow widgets. Each row can contain a normal widget or a
TableCell widget. TableCell can control the alignment of the widget
it contains. One of the differences between a GridView and a Table is
that a GridView tries to size its columns and rows based on its widgets,

--- Page 219 ---
while a Table forces its widgets to fit into the size of the column. The
following is an example:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp(
        debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
        home: Scaffold(
// 1
            body: Table(
// 2
          border: TableBorder.all(),
// 3
          columnWidths: const <int, 
TableColumnWidth>{
            0: IntrinsicColumnWidth(),
            1: FlexColumnWidth(),
            2: FixedColumnWidth(64),
          },
          defaultVerticalAlignment: 
TableCellVerticalAlignment.middle,
// 4
          children: <TableRow>[
// 5
            TableRow(
              children: <Widget>[
                Text('Row 1: Column 1'),

--- Page 220 ---
// 6
                TableCell(
                  verticalAlignment: 
TableCellVerticalAlignment.top,
                  child: Text('Row 1: Column 2'),
                ),
                Text('Row 1: Column 3'),
              ],
            ),
            TableRow(
              decoration: const BoxDecoration(
                color: Colors.grey,
              ),
              children: <Widget>[
                Text('Row 2: Column 1'),
                Text('Row 2: Column 2'),
                Center(
                  child: Text('Row 2: Column 2'),
                ),
              ],
            ),
          ],
        )));
  }
This will be displayed as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 221 ---
Figure 7.3: Card
The code uses several widgets that are needed for a Table: TableRow for
rows and TableCells or other widgets for the individual items. The code is
described by the following:
1. Start with the Table widget.
2. You can specify a border if needed. This can specify the color, line
width, and border radius.
3. You can specify different column widths. Either fixed or sized for the
included widgets.
4. The children should have a list of TableRow.
5. Each TableRow can have a list of table columns. The number of
widgets should match the number of columns.
6. Besides regular widgets, you can use a TableCell to add more
formatting.
Of course, tables are great for data that you would use in a spreadsheet, but
they can be used if you want fixed columns.
Card
Cards have rounded borders with elevations. They are useful for having
sections stand out from the rest of the layout. You can add a child widget that
can also contain other widgets. For example:
    Card(
      child: Column(
        children: [
          Text('Title of Object'),
          Text('Description of Object')
        ],

--- Page 222 ---
      ),
    )
You can set the color, shadowColor, surfaceTintColor,
elevation, and shape. The following is an example of a ticket card:
Figure 7.4: Card
Apart from the default constructor (which builds an elevated card), you can
use Card.filled for a filled card and Card.outlined for an outline
card.
BottomSheets
As the name implies, BottomSheets are information items that are on the
bottom of the screen. There are two kinds: Persistent and modal. Persistent
sheets will stay in place, while modal sheets force the user to interact with
the sheet until it is dismissed. These sheets can be animated and can have a
drag handle. To show a bottom sheet, you would use the
showBottomSheet method, and in the builder function, you would return
a widget. You can change the background color using the
backgroundColor parameter. A BottomSheet might look as follows:

--- Page 223 ---
Figure 7.5: BottomSheet
The code is as follows:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp(
      debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
      home: SafeArea(
        child: Scaffold(
          body: TextButton(

--- Page 224 ---
            child: Text('Show Me'),
            onPressed: () {
// 1
              showModalBottomSheet(
                context: context,
// 2
                builder: (BuildContext context) {
                  return Container(
                    height: 300,
                    child: Column(
                      mainAxisAlignment: 
MainAxisAlignment.center,
                      children: [
                        Text(
                          'This is a BottomSheet',
                          style: 
TextStyle(fontSize: 24),
                        ),
                      ],
                    ),
                  );
                },
              );
            },
          ),
        ),

--- Page 225 ---
      ),
    );
  }
This code shows a modal bottom sheet when the user presses the text button.
Slivers
Slivers are scrollable widgets and can be used in lists of slivers. You need to
use a CustomScrollView as a parent widget and then add slivers to the
slivers list parameter. There are many different types of slivers, as follows:
• SliverList: Displays a linear list of items.
• SliverGrid: Displays a 2D array of children.
• SliverAppBar: A material design app bar that integrates with a
CustomScrollView and allows the bar to change while scrolling
other items.
• SliverToBoxAdapter: A sliver that contains a single box widget. Useful
for converting slivers to a widget that conforms to a regular type of
widget.
• SliverPadding: Adds padding around another sliver.
The first sliver you will use is SliverPadding. You will create your own
sliver widget to create a divider. In the widgets folder, create a new file
named sliver_divider.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
class SliverDivider extends StatelessWidget {
  const SliverDivider({super.key});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return const SliverPadding(
      padding: EdgeInsets.only(
          left: 16, top: 8, right: 16, bottom: 8),
      sliver: SliverToBoxAdapter(
        child: Divider(

--- Page 226 ---
          color: primaryButton,
          thickness: 1.0,
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
}
Since this widget returns a SliverPadding, it is itself a sliver. The
SliverToBoxAdapter class converts the widgets below to sliver (in this
case, just a regular divider).
Open up genre_screen.dart. We are going to convert some of the
items into slivers. Find the first Row. Before the row, add the following:
               Expanded(
                child: CustomScrollView(
                  slivers: [
                    SliverList(
                      delegate: SliverChildListDelegate(
                        [
Remove the Row and GenreSearchRow and replace it with the following:
                          Padding(
                            padding:
                                const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(16, 16.0, 0.0, 24.0),
                            child: Text('Find a Movie',
                                style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.titleLarge),
                          ),
                          GenreSearchRow((searchString) {
                          }),
                        ],
                      ),
                    ),
Change the Divider to SliverDivider and import the widget. You
will next need to fix the number of parentheses and brackets at the end. This

--- Page 227 ---
is good practice as you will do this many times. The following is what the
ending of the widget looks like:
                ],
              ),
            ),
          ],
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
}
Dealing with parentheses is one area that gets messy with widgets. However,
the more you break your widgets up into their own classes, the smaller each
class will be and the easier it will be to read. Hot reload your app to make
sure it still works. You should get an error, and it should look as follows:
A RenderViewport expected a child of type RenderSliver but received 
a child of type _RenderMergeableMaterialListBody.
Any idea what this means? If you have a list of slivers and one of them is not
one, you will get this message. That means one of the widgets is not a sliver.
It looks like VerticalMovieList uses an Expanded (which can only
be in a row or column) and a ListView. Let us change that. Open up
vert_movie_list.dart and change Expanded and the
ListView.builder (up to the itemBuilder) to the following:
    return SliverList(
      delegate: SliverChildBuilderDelegate(
        childCount: movies.length, 
        (BuildContext context, int index) {
Open genre_section.dart and add the following before the
ExpansionPanelList:
    return SliverList(
      delegate: SliverChildListDelegate(
        [
Remove the return before the ExpansionPanelList. Fix the ending
parentheses. Next, open up sort_picker.dart. Add a new parameter,

--- Page 228 ---
as follows:
  final bool useSliver;
Replace the constructor with the following:
  const SortPicker({required this.useSliver, required 
this.onSortSelected, super.key});
Replace the line: Widget build(BuildContext context) { with
the following:
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    if (widget.useSliver) {
      return SliverToBoxAdapter(
          child: buildRow()
      );
    } else {
      return buildRow();
    }
  }
  Widget buildRow() {
Back in genre_screen.dart, add the following:
                        useSliver: true,
The code provides the parameter to the SortPicker. Perform a hot restart,
and the code should work. The following shows the Genres screen with the
list of movies and the new SliverList:

--- Page 229 ---
Figure 7.6: Genre screen
You can now scroll through the list of movies and see all the movies on the
list.
Movie trailers
One area that needs work is the ability to show videos. In the case of the
movie app, the ability to show movie trailers. These are short videos that
showcase the movie. To show a video from YouTube, we will use a plugin
called pod_player. Open up pubspec.yaml and add the following:
  pod_player: ^0.2.2
Select pub get. In the ui/screens folder, create a new folder named
videos. Then, create a new dart file named video_page.dart. Then

--- Page 230 ---
add the following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 
'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:pod_player/pod_player.dart';
class VideoPage extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  final String movieVideo;
  const VideoPage(this.movieVideo, {super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<VideoPage> createState() => 
_VideoPageState();
}
class _VideoPageState extends 
ConsumerState<VideoPage> {
  late final PodPlayerController 
podPlayerController;
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Placeholder();
  }
}
Here, the only new code is the PodPlayerController. This class is a
controller for the PodVideoPlayer widget from the pod_player
plugin. Since this variable is defined as a late variable, we need to initialize
it using the initState method. First, we need to create a utility method
for building a YouTube video URL. Open up utils.dart and add the
following:
String youtubeUrlFromId(String videoId) {

--- Page 231 ---
  return 'https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=$videoId';
}
This is a simple method that just concatenates the video id to the URL. Back
in video_page.dart, add the following before the build method:
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
// 1
    final playVideoFrom = PlayVideoFrom.youtube(
      youtubeUrlFromId(widget.movieVideo),
    );
// 2
    podPlayerController = PodPlayerController(
        playVideoFrom: playVideoFrom,
        podPlayerConfig: const 
PodPlayerConfig(autoPlay: false))
      ..initialise();
  }
  @override
  void dispose() {
// 3
    podPlayerController.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  }
These two methods, initState and dispose of, set up and dispose of the
video controller:
1. Use the new utility method to get the URL and create a

--- Page 232 ---
PlayVideoFrom class to pass to the controller.
2. Create the controller passing in the video URL class and config.
3. Dispose of the controller when done.
Next, add a method to get the video player. Use the following code:
  Widget getVideoPlayer(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
      appBar: AppBar(
        backgroundColor: screenBackground,
        leading: BackButton(
          color: Colors.white,
          onPressed: () {},
        ),
        centerTitle: false,
        title: Text('Back', style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.headlineMedium),
      ),
      body: Container(
        width: double.infinity,
        height: double.infinity,
        color: screenBackground,
        child: Column(
          mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,
          crossAxisAlignment: 
CrossAxisAlignment.center,
          children: [
            Expanded(
              child: PodVideoPlayer(

--- Page 233 ---
                  controller: podPlayerController,
                  matchVideoAspectRatioToFrame: 
true,
                  ),
            ),
          ],
        ),
      ),    
    );
  }
At the bottom of the method is the PodVideoPlayer, use the controller
and a flag to match the video’s aspect ratio to the screen. Now replace the
build method with the following:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    SystemChrome.setPreferredOrientations([
      DeviceOrientation.portraitUp,
      DeviceOrientation.portraitDown,
      DeviceOrientation.landscapeLeft,
      DeviceOrientation.landscapeRight,
    ]);
    return getVideoPlayer(context);
  }
The SystemChrome class is useful for changing the orientation of the
device. Here, we change the device orientation to allow landscape and then
return the video player. Return to main_screen.dart and change the
last Placerholder with the following:
    screens.add(VideoPage('QwW5RD02uJo'));

--- Page 234 ---
This calls the video page with a YouTube key that is a trailer for a Kung Fu
Panda movie. Stop the app (When you have plugins that have device-
specific code, you must rebuild your app and you cannot hot reload). Restart
the app and click on the Favorites button.
Note: That we are just using this page to show the video but will be replacing it with favorites
later.
The device will turn to landscape, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 7.7: Video screen
If you press the expand button, you will see the window expand to full
screen. However, this depends on the video that you are playing. This
specific video was built for phones in portrait mode, as shown in Figure 7.8:

--- Page 235 ---
Figure 7.8: Fullscreen
In the chapter on the web and desktop, we will use a different package to
show videos for the web.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned a lot about the more advanced widgets like
ListView, GridView, Table, BottomSheets, and Slivers. You were able to
update the app to use these advanced widgets to show more items. You also
created a video page and were able to show a video trailer for a movie.
In the next chapter, you will learn about navigation and routing. This is a
very important topic that will allow you to switch between different screens.
You will use a specific package to push screens on a stack and pop them off
when returning.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 236 ---
CHAPTER 8
Navigation and Routing
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about how Flutter apps navigate between
pages. You will also learn about the built-in Navigator widget in Flutter and
a newer way to handle navigation with Navigator 2.0. In addition, you will
learn about packages that make navigation easier, and use one of the
packages to hook up the movie app to allow the user to move among the
pages of the app.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Navigator widget
• Named routes
• Deep linking
• Bottom navigation
• GoRouter and AutoRoute
• Connecting the movie app
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will understand how the old Navigator and
the new Navigator work. You will also have an understanding of deep

--- Page 237 ---
linking and several navigation packages. You will set up AutoRoute as the
navigation package and start creating routes. Finally, you will build up the
movie details page, learn how to create a route and use navigation to go
there.
Navigator widget
Navigation is the ability to go from one screen to another. In Flutter, the
system uses a stack to push screens to the front and to pop them when the
user is done with that screen. It is important to understand how the old and
new system works before using some of the packages that will make the
process even easier.
Any app needs the ability to transition from one page to another and then
back. Flutter uses the Navigator widget. These pages are called routes in
Flutter. Routing consists of just pushing and popping pages. Navigator 1.0
was used before Flutter 1.22 and has some serious disadvantages, as follows:
• The route stack is not exposed to the developer (Makes it hard to replace
pages).
• Navigator does not update the web URL path (for web apps).
• Does not handle the back button on Android devices well.
In Flutter 1.22 the Router API (or Navigator 2.0) was introduced. The
advantages of the Router API are as follows:
• Exposes the Navigator’s page stack.
• Is backward compatible with Navigator 1.0.
• Handles the back button on Android devices.
• Allows nested Navigators.
• Deep linking and web URLs are handled.
Navigator
The Navigator widget has an array of pages. A Page is an abstract class that
has a name and argument. The most common page subclass used is
MaterialPage. The pages field is the list of pages that can be shown in an
application. You can change the items in the page list when your app

--- Page 238 ---
changes so that different pages are shown. There are a few important
methods, as follows:
• push(context, route): Push a new route/page to the stack.
• pushNamed(context, routeName, arguments): Find the route with the
given name and push it onto the stack.
• pop(context): Pop the current, top-level page off the stack, showing the
next page on the stack.
There is also a onPopPage callback parameter. This is a function that takes
a route and result value, as follows:
typedef PopPageCallback = bool Function(Route<dynamic> route, dynamic 
result);
This function must call route.didPop and update the list of pages to not
include that route/page. The following is an example of an onPopPage
usage:
MaterialApp(
    ...
    home: Navigator(
      pages: [],
      onPopPage: (route, result)=>route.didPop(result),
    ),
)
The pages list would be filled with a list of MaterialPages with a
MaterialPage that looks as follows:
MaterialPage(
      key: ValueKey(‘MovieListing’),
      child: MovieListingScreen(),
    )
You could put some logic to return different pages, but that is messy and
does not work well for large amounts of screens and complex logic.
Router

--- Page 239 ---
The Router widget is a page dispatcher that wraps a Navigator class. To use
deep linking, you will need to use the Router widget. Here is what the flow
looks like for the Router API (Figure 8.1):
Figure 8.1: Router API
This shows some of the important classes involved with navigation. We will
be using a package to handle this and make it easier, but it is important to
understand how the Flutter system works.
RouterDelegate
The RouterDelegate responds to app state and route changes and builds
a new Navigator with an updated list of pages.
The RouterDelegate class has a few methods, listed as follows:
• setInitialRoutePath: Given a class with the route, configure the router.
• setRestoredRoutePath: Given a class, restore the route state.
• setNewRoutePath: Set a new route path given the data class.
• popRoute: Remove the current page from the stack.
RouterInformationParser
The RouterInformationParser is an abstract class that acts as a
delegate between the router widget and the route information provided by
the system. It is responsible for parsing the route information into a

--- Page 240 ---
configuration object that can be understood by the RouterDelegate. The
RouterInformationParser transforms RouteInformation
values into a user-defined class.
The RouteInformationParser class has three methods, as follows:
• parseRouteInformation: Parse a RouteInformation parameter and
return a data class.
• parseRouteInformationWithDependencies: Has an extra
BuildContext parameter.
• restoreRouteInformation: Given the data class, return a
RouteInformation instance.
RouteInformationProvider
The RouteInformationProvider provides the app's current route and
notifies listeners of any changes. It will be used by the Router widget to
determine which screen to display. It is also used to monitor changes in the
route and notify listeners.
The RouteInformationProvider class has just one method:
• routerReportsNewRouteInformation: As this class is a
ValueListenable, you can take this new information and notify
users of the change.
MaterialApp
The MaterialApp class can either be provided as a router class or
individual parameters. Here are some parameters associated with navigation:
• navigatorKey: Global Key tied to the Navigator.
• initialRoute: Starting route (String-based).
• navigatorObservers: List of listeners to navigation events.
• onUnknownRoute: Uses a function that takes a RouteSettings instance
and returns a Route to handle unknown routes.
• onNavigationNotification: Nofication callback listener.
• routes: Map of route names and WidgetBuilders.

--- Page 241 ---
One of the nice features about a global Navigator key is that you can use it
anywhere to navigate to other pages. However, you can also just use
Navigator.of(context) to get the current Navigator. You could use
the key if you had multiple Navigators. To use a global key, you would
define it as:
final navigatorKey = GlobalKey<NavigatorState>();
You would then add it to the MaterialApp and other pages could push a page
as follows:
    navigatorKey.currentState?.pushNamed(“newRoute”);
The second method is to use the MaterialApp.router method. It takes
the following parameters:
• routeInformationProvider: Provides route information for the router
widget.
• routeInformationParser: Parses route information into a class.
• routerDelegate: Main class for handling routing.
• routerConfig: This can be used in place of the other parameters.
Contains all the above elements.
• backButtonDispatcher: Handles back button actions. There are two
provided classes you can use (or create your own):
ChildBackButtonDispatcher and
RootBackButtonDispatcher. The root dispatcher is the default.
The child dispatcher is for handling back button presses from a parent.
You will normally use the router method with packages as they have a
config class you can use which makes it easier to set up.
Named routes
The Navigator class uses the pushNamed method to push a string route
onto the stack. These are called named routes as you give them a string
name. Other classes can use this string to go to that page. Another way to
define routes is with the route’s parameter to MaterialApp. It looks as
follows:
class MyApp extends StatelessWidget {

--- Page 242 ---
  const MyApp({Key? key}) : super(key: key);
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp(
      debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
// 1
      routes: {
        'DetailPage': (context) => DetailPage()
      },
// 2
      home: Page1(),
    );
  }
}
// 3
class Page1 extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return TextButton(onPressed: () => 
Navigator.pushNamed(context, 'DetailPage'), child: 
Text('Details'));
  }
}
// 4
class DetailPage extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {

--- Page 243 ---
    return TextButton(onPressed: () => 
Navigator.pop(context), child: Text('Return'));
  }
}
Here we have the MyApp and two pages: Page1 and DetailPage. The
following is a detailed explanation:
1. Define the routes based on a string key value.
2. Start with Page1.
3. Page1 just shows a button that when clicked, pushes the Detail page
by its route name.
4. The detail page just pops the detail page from the stack and returns to
Page1.
You can also pass in arguments. This would look as follows:
Navigator.pushNamed(context, 'DetailPage', arguments: 'Test'),
Then, in the DetailPage class, you would retrieve the arguments with the
ModalRoute class as follows:
    final String args = ModalRoute.of(context)!.settings.arguments as String;
    return TextButton(onPressed: () => Navigator.pop(context), child: 
Text(args));
You can also return data from a page. When you call the pop method, you
can pass the result as the last parameter. Here is an example:
class Page1 extends StatefulWidget {
  @override
  State<Page1> createState() => _Page1State();
}
class _Page1State extends State<Page1> {
  String textMessage = 'Details';
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
// 1

--- Page 244 ---
    return TextButton(onPressed: () async {
      textMessage = await 
Navigator.pushNamed(context, 'DetailPage', 
arguments: 'Test') as String;
      setState(() {
      });
    }, child: Text(textMessage));
  }
}
class DetailPage extends StatelessWidget {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
// 2
    final String args = 
ModalRoute.of(context)!.settings.arguments as 
String;
// 3
    return TextButton(onPressed: () => 
Navigator.pop(context, 'Result'), child: 
Text(args));
  }
}
Here we have converted the Page1 class to a StatefulWidget and have
a string message. The explanation of the code is as follows:
1. Make the onPressed method an async method and await the
results. Update the state when finished.
2. Get the passed in arguments.
3. Return the results when popping the screen.
Deep linking

--- Page 245 ---
Another way to use routes is through deep linking. A deep link is a URL that
points to a specific page in an app. Just like on a web page, clicking on a
URL in an email or webpage can take the user to a page in an app if the app
is installed on their phone. Once the app receives the deep link, the router
needs to figure out which page to go to. A URL looks as shown in Figure
8.2:
Figure 8.2: URLs
A URL is made up of a scheme (usually https), a host name (a specific
website), a path to the page, and a set of query parameters (after a ?).
Custom schemes
In addition to the https scheme, on mobile, you can create your own scheme.
For example, we could create a scheme called movieapp. This would look
as follows:
movieapp://moviedetails/?id=1234
This only works on mobiles. On Android, this is called a deep link while on
iOS, it is called a custom URL. This scheme needs to be defined in
Android’s AndroidManifest.xml and iOS’s info.plist files. This
is an easy way to set up a link but comes with some downsides:
• Anyone can use the same scheme.
• You have to have the app installed for this to work.
If you want to use an https scheme for deep linking, you need to own the
host site. These links are called App Links on Android and Universal Links
on iOS. There is also host verification that is performed by Android and iOS
devices.
Android deep links

--- Page 246 ---
To handle deep links on Android, you will need to add an entry in the
AndroidManifest.xml file. The entry code is as follows:
<intent-filter android:autoVerify="true">
  <action android:name="android.intent.action.VIEW" />
  <category android:name="android.intent.category.DEFAULT" />
  <category android:name="android.intent.category.BROWSABLE" />
  <data android:scheme="https" />
  <data android:host="yourDomain.com" />
</intent-filter>
For custom schemes, add the following code:
<meta-data
    android:name="flutter_deeplinking_enabled"
    android:value="true" />
<intent-filter android:autoVerify="true">
  <action android:name="android.intent.action.VIEW" 
/>
  <category 
android:name="android.intent.category.DEFAULT" />
  <category 
android:name="android.intent.category.BROWSABLE" />
  <data android:scheme="yourScheme" />
  <data android:host="yourDomain.com" />
</intent-filter>
You would add this intent filter to an Activity that would handle the https
scheme. For Flutter, it would go to the Flutter MainActivity (a subclass
of FlutterActivity) that is created for you. You can also set a path if
you want your app to handle just a specific area of a URL. To find out more
about the possible data values you can visit:
https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/manifest/data-element
Verifying a domain

--- Page 247 ---
To use URLs with your own domain, you need to create a file named
assetlinks.json. The file will look as follows:
[{
  "relation": ["delegate_permission/common.handle_all_urls"],
  "target": {
    "namespace": "android_app",
    "package_name": "com.bpb.movieapp",
    "sha256_cert_fingerprints":
    ["FF:2A:CF:7B:DD:CC:F1:03:3E:E8:B2:27:7C:A2:
E3:3C:DE:13:DB:AC:8E:EB:3A:B9:72:A1:0E:26:8A:F5:EC:AF"]
  }
}]
You will need to use your own package_name and sha25 value. You can
create the sha value by using:
keytool -list -v -keystore <path-to-keystore> -alias <key alias> -storepass 
<store password> -keypass <key password>
You then need to store this file at:
<webdomain>/.well-known/assetlinks.json
When you have everything setup on your website, you can use the tester at
https://developers.google.com/digital-asset-links/tools/generator.
Testing Android
To test links on Android you will need to test from the command line. You
will use the adb command that is located in android/platform-
tools/ folder. Make sure your path is set or just type in the full path. For
https links, you would use:
adb shell am start -a android.intent.action.VIEW \
  -c android.intent.category.BROWSABLE \
  -d https://yourDomain.com \
  <package name>
For custom schemes use:

--- Page 248 ---
adb shell am start -a android.intent.action.VIEW \
  -c android.intent.category.BROWSABLE \
  -d yourScheme://yourDomain.com \
  <package name>
You can also email yourself the link on the phone and test that way. For https
links, you will get a dialog on Android asking if you want to show the link
with a web browser or your app. This is normal and will go away if you have
the android:autoVerify="true" setting in your manifest and your
website is set up properly.
iOS deep links
For iOS, the process is different and requires you to modify the
info.plist file. You can do this in Xcode, Android Studio, or a text
editor. The first thing you need to do is add the Universal Link Capability. In
Xcode, click on the Runner target, then the Signing & Capabilities tab, and
then press the Capability button, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 8.3: Add Capability
You will see the following dialog:

--- Page 249 ---
Figure 8.4: Associated Domains
Double-click the Associated Domains. In the Domains text area, change the
link to applinks:<your domain>, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 8.5: Associated Domains link
iOS custom scheme
The steps to create a custom scheme are as follows:
1. For a custom scheme, you will need to edit the info.plist file. In
the files pane, click on Info, as shown in Figure 8.6:

--- Page 250 ---
Figure 8.6: Info.plist
2. Then in the table click on the first plus icon to bring up a list of types, as
shown in the following figure:


--- Page 251 ---
Figure 8.7: Add Item
3. Type URL types to find the entry, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 8.8: URL types
4. Next, click on the plus icon and choose URL Schemes, as shown in
Figure 8.9:

--- Page 252 ---
Figure 8.9: URL scheme
5. Next, add your URL scheme and Identifier. Here we have added
movieapps as the scheme and URL Identifier (Figure 8.10).
Figure 8.10: Final Scheme
6. In Android Studio you can open the info.plist file and it will look
as follows:

--- Page 253 ---
Figure 8.11: info.plist
7. After the array, add the following entry:
<key>FlutterDeepLinkingEnabled</key>
<true/>
This enables Flutter Deep linking (although it may interfere with some
packages).
iOS verification
iOS verification is similar to but different than Android. You need to create a
file named: apple-app-site-association (no extension). The file
will look as follows:
{
  "applinks":{
    "apps":[
       
    ],
    "details":[
      {
        "appIDs":[
          "TeamID.BundleID"
        ],
        "components":[
          {

--- Page 254 ---
            "/":"/movies",
            "comment":"Matches URL with a path /movies"
          },
          {
            "/":"/moviedetails/*",
            "comment":"Matches URL with path that starts with /moviedetails/"
          }
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
Use your Team ID and add all the paths you use. Note that iOS requires
adding supported paths. The file needs to reside at:
https://yourDomain.com/.well-known/apple-app-site-association.
Testing iOS URLs
To test iOS URLs you will use the command line but with Apple command
line tools. For https links, type the following:
xcrun simctl openurl booted https://yourDomain.com/path
Make sure you have setup XCode properly so that you can run this
command. You can also use the full path:
/usr/bin/xcrun
For custom schemes type the following:
xcrun simctl openurl booted 
yourScheme://yourDomain.com/path
Bottom navigation
One of the simplest ways to navigate is with the bottom navigation widget.
You saw this in main_screen.dart. Add the following:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(

--- Page 255 ---
      body: screens[index],
      bottomNavigationBar: BottomNavigationBar(
        items: const [
          BottomNavigationBarItem(icon: 
Icon(Icons.home), label: 'Home'),
          BottomNavigationBarItem(
              icon: Icon(Symbols.genres), label: 
‘Genre’),
          BottomNavigationBarItem(icon: 
Icon(Icons.favorite), label: 'Favorites'),
        ],
        currentIndex: index,
        onTap: (navIndex) {
          setState(() {
            index = navIndex;
          });
        },
      ),
    );
  }
This is a widget that is at the bottom of the screen and contains three to five
items. You use the BottomNavigationBarItem class to define an icon
and label. When a button is selected, the onTap method is called. Usually,
you need to change the current index, but you can perform additional actions
if needed. A newer Material 3 navigation widget is the NavigationBar
class. Open up main_screen.dart and change the
bottomNavigationBar code to the following:
NavigationBar(
        destinations: const [
          NavigationDestination(icon: Icon(Icons.home), label: ‘Home’),

--- Page 256 ---
          NavigationDestination(icon: Icon(Symbols.genres), label: ‘Genre’),
          NavigationDestination(icon: Icon(Icons.favorite), label: ‘Favorites’),     
],
        selectedIndex: index,
        onDestinationSelected: (navIndex) {
          setState(() {
            index = navIndex;
          });
        },
      ),
This is similar to a BottomNavigationBar but uses the keyword
destinations and then uses NavigationDestination instances.
currentIndex is now selectedIndex and onTap is now
onDestinationSelected. One key difference is that you will need to
change the theme to change colors of the text and icons. In addition to the
NavigationBar class, Material provides the NavigationRail class.
This widget is used on the left or right side of the screen to navigation
between a small amount of items. Open up theme.dart and add the
following after appBarTheme:
    navigationBarTheme: NavigationBarThemeData(
        backgroundColor: searchBarBackground,
        labelTextStyle: WidgetStateTextStyle.resolveWith((Set<WidgetState> 
states) {
          // If the item is selected, use primary color; otherwise, use your desired 
unselected color
          if (states.contains(WidgetState.selected)) {
            return TextStyle(color: Colors.white);
          }
          return TextStyle(color: posterBorder); // Unselected color
        }),
        iconTheme: WidgetStateProperty.all<IconThemeData>(
            IconThemeData(color: Colors.white)),
        indicatorColor: posterBorder),

--- Page 257 ---
This will set the background, icon, and the text color. The tricky part is the
WidgetStateTextStyle.resolveWith method. This just returns a
different text style depending on if the widget is selected or not.
GoRouter and AutoRoute
You may have noticed that navigating with a router is not that easy. That is
why there are several packages out there that help with this. We will cover
two popular packages: GoRouter (recommended by Google) and AutoRoute
(recommended by the author). Both of them are easy to use.
GoRouter
The GoRouter package is maintained by Google. It is the recommended
package to use for routing and is a good package. The steps to use
GoRouter are as follows:
1. To use GoRouter you would create code to define your routes:
import 'package:go_router/go_router.dart';
// GoRouter configuration
final _router = GoRouter(
  routes: [
    GoRoute(
      path: '/',
      builder: (context, state) => MainScreen(),
    ),
  ],
);
This defines one main path, using the URL-like string ‘/’. That starting
path will show the MainScreen widget.
2. To use the router, you would change the MaterialApp call using the
following code:
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp.router(
      routerConfig: _router,
    );

--- Page 258 ---
  }
Both GoRouter and AutoRoute use the routerConfig
parameter (remember that this parameter provides the dispatcher and
provider classes).
3. GoRouter’s routes can have child routes as follows:
GoRoute(
  path: '/',
  builder: (context, state) {
    return MainScreen();
  },
  routes: [
    GoRoute(
      path: 'details',
      builder: (context, state) {
        return MovieDetails();
      },
    ),
  ],
)
4. You can even pass parameters such as:
GoRoute(
  path: '/details/:id,
  builder: (context, state) => const MovieDetails(id: 
state.pathParameters[id]),
),
You can find documentation on GoRouter at
https://pub.dev/packages/go_router. There are a lot of other options but
since we will use the AutoRoute package for the app, you can investigate
more about the package at the URL provided above.
AutoRoute
We found the AutoRoute package a bit easier to use. The routes are
similar to GoRouter, but AutoRoute uses code generation to make the

--- Page 259 ---
process a bit smoother. The steps to install the AutoRoute package are as
follows:
1. Open pubspec.yaml and add the following dependency:
  auto_route: ^8.2.0
2. Then in the dev_dependencies section, add the following:
auto_route_generator: ^8.0.0
3. Perform a Pub Get. Next, create a router folder under the lib folder.
Then create the file app_routes.dart. Then add the following:
import 'package:auto_route/auto_route.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/main_screen.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/screens/genres/genre_screen.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/screens/home/home_screen.dart';
import ‘package:movies/ui/screens/videos/video_page.dart’;
part ‘app_routes.gr.dart’;
@AutoRouterConfig()
class AppRouter extends _$AppRouter {
  @override
  List<AutoRoute> get routes => [
    AutoRoute(path: '/', initial: true, page: MainRoute.page, children: [
      AutoRoute(path: 'home', page: HomeRoute.page),
      AutoRoute(path: ‘Genre’, page: GenreRoute.page),
      AutoRoute(path: ‘favorites’, page: FavoriteRoute.page),
    ]),
  ];
}
The part declaration will be the file generated by AutoRoute. The
@AutoRouterConfig() annotation tells the generator to create the
_$AppRouter class. The routes getter returns one top-level route
named MainRoute with three children of HomeRoute,
GenreRoute, and FavoriteRoute.
4. To generate the route page classes, we need to add some annotations to
those classes. First, open home_screen.dart and add the following
before the class definition:

--- Page 260 ---
@RoutePage(name: 'HomeRoute')
You will need to import the auto_route package for this. For
genre_screen.dart add:
@RoutePage(name: 'GenreRoute')
and for video_page.dart add:
@RoutePage(name: 'VideoPageRoute')
5. For the favorites page, create a new folder in the screens folder named
favorites. Create a new file named favorite_screen.dart.
Add a placeholder widget, as follows:
import 'package:auto_route/auto_route.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
@RoutePage(name: 'FavoriteRoute')
class FavoriteScreen extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  const FavoriteScreen({super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<FavoriteScreen> createState() => 
_FavoriteScreenState();
}
class _FavoriteScreenState extends ConsumerState<FavoriteScreen> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return const Placeholder();
  }
}
6. In the terminal window run the builder command:
dart run build_runner build
This will generate all the routes for each page.
7. Open up main.dart and replace the build method with:
    @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
// 1
    return AutoTabsScaffold(

--- Page 261 ---
      backgroundColor: screenBackground,
// 2
      routes: [
        HomeRoute(),
        GenreRoute(),
        FavoriteRoute(),
      ],
      bottomNavigationBuilder: (_, tabsRouter) => 
buildBottomBar(tabsRouter),
    );
  }
  Widget buildBottomBar(TabsRouter tabsRouter) {
// 3
    return NavigationBar(
      destinations: const [
        NavigationDestination(icon: Icon(Icons.home), label: ‘Home’),
        NavigationDestination(icon: Icon(Symbols.genres), label: 
‘Genre’),
        NavigationDestination(icon: Icon(Icons.favorite), label: 
‘Favorites’),
      ],
// 4
      selectedIndex: tabsRouter.activeIndex,
      onDestinationSelected: (navIndex) {
        setState(() {
// 5
          tabsRouter.setActiveIndex(navIndex);
        });
      },
    );
  }
8. Instead of a regular Scaffold, this code uses the AutoTabsScaffold
widget from the AutoRoute package. This has a routes parameter that
lists the three routes we created earlier. The steps are as follows:

--- Page 262 ---
a. Use the AutoTabsScaffold to create a Scaffold that handles
routes.
b. Return the list of routes.
c. Return the NavigationBar.
d. Use the tabsRouter’s activeIndex field for the index.
e. Set the tabsRouter active index.
9. Now that we have the router built, we need a way to provide the router
to other pages. We need a Riverpod provider. Open up
providers.dart and add the following:
import package:movies/router/app_routes.dart';
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true) 
AppRouter appRouter(AppRouterRef ref) => AppRouter();
10. In the terminal window, run the builder command:
dart run build_runner build
This will generate the provider for the AppRouter.
11. Open up main.dart and replace MainApp with:
class MainApp extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  const MainApp({super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<MainApp> createState() => _MainAppState();
}
class _MainAppState extends ConsumerState<MainApp> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
// 1
    final router = ref.watch(appRouterProvider);
// 2
    return MaterialApp.router(
// 3
      routerConfig: router.config(),
      title: 'Movies',
      debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
      theme: createTheme(),

--- Page 263 ---
    );
  }
}
Here, we convert MainApp to a ConsumerStatefulWidget
(From Riverpod) so that we can have access to a ref class.
12. Then, follow these steps:
a. Watch the appRouterProvider. This gives us access to our
AutoRoute router.
b. Use MaterialApp.router to provide a routerConfig.
c. The class that was built has a config method that will return a
RouterConfig instance.
13. Stop the app and restart. The app should look the same. Now, we are
setup to add more pages and navigate back and forth.
Connecting the movie app
So far you have not done any navigation other than going from one bottom
navigation item to another. We have not built the other pages because there
was no easy way to get to them. We will now build the movie details page.
This page will show the details of a specific movie. It will show a large
poster image, title, description, a row of icons, trailers, and the cast
members. Here is the Figma design:

--- Page 264 ---
Figure 8.12: Detailed design
As you can see, this screen can be built from top to bottom. The steps are as
follows:
1. In the ui/screens folder, create a new folder named

--- Page 265 ---
movie_detail. Inside this folder, create a movie_detail.dart
file. Add the MovieDetail class:
import 'package:auto_route/auto_route.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import ' package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
@RoutePage(name: 'MovieDetailRoute')
class MovieDetail extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  final int movieId;
  const MovieDetail(this.movieId, {super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<MovieDetail> createState() => _MovieDetailState();
}
class _MovieDetailState extends ConsumerState<MovieDetail> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // TODO Add Layout
  }
}
This defines the MovieDetail class to take a movieId as a
parameter. At this point, the movie id will not be used until we get real
data.
2. We will hard-code a detail image for now. Add the Scaffold and
AppBar:
return SafeArea(
      child: Scaffold(
        appBar: AppBar(
          backgroundColor: screenBackground,
          leading: BackButton(
            color: Colors.white,
            onPressed: () {
              context.router.maybePopTop();
            },

--- Page 266 ---
          ),
          centerTitle: false,
          title:
              Text('Back', style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.headlineMedium),
        ),
        body: Container(
          color: screenBackground,
          child: Column(mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min, children: [
// TODO Add widgets
]),
        ),
      ),
    );
This will just have a back button and a Column for now.
3. Notice the BackButton’s onPressed method. This calls for the
following:
context.router.maybePopTop();
This will pop this screen off the stack and return to the calling page.
4. Return to app_routes.dart and add the following at the end of the
list:
    AutoRoute(path:'/details/:movieId', page: MovieDetailRoute.page, 
maintainState: false),
This provides the route as well as a path that can be used for deep
linking.
5. In the terminal, run the following:
dart run build_runner build
This will build the route for the MovieDetails page.
6. Now we need to update a few files. Open up utils.dart and add:
typedef OnMovieTap = void Function(int movieId);
This defines a function that will return a movie ID when something is
tapped.

--- Page 267 ---
7. Open home_screen_image.dart and add the following before the
build method:
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  HomeScreenImage({super.key, required this.onMovieTap});
This constructor takes a onMovieTap field that we defined earlier.
8. To use this method, we need to surround the image with a
GestureDetector. Wrap CachedNetworkImage with the
following:
          return GestureDetector(
            onTap: () {
              onMovieTap(1);
            },
9. Back in HomeScreen, change the HomeScreenImage line with:
              HomeScreenImage(onMovieTap: (id) {
                context.router.push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: id));
              }),
This adds the onMovieTap field.
10. AutoRoute adds an extension to the BuildContext class where you
can access the router and push a new route. Here, we are pushing the
MovieDetailRoute with the movie id. The AutoRoute generated
code will use this route to push the MovieDetail screen on the stack.
Perform a Hot Restart, then click on the top image. The screen will be as
follows:

--- Page 268 ---
Figure 8.13: Detail one
This just shows the AppBar with the back button and an empty screen
for now.
11. The first widget we will need to create is the detail image. Inside of the
movie_detail folder create a new file named
detail_image.dart. Add:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
class DetailImage extends StatelessWidget {
  const DetailImage({super.key});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return const Placeholder();
  }
}
12. Now, replace the placeholder with:
// 1

--- Page 269 ---
    final screenWidth = MediaQuery.of(context).size.width;
    return Padding(
      padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 8.0, right: 8),
      child: SizedBox(
        height: 200,
// 2
        child: Stack(children: [
          Align(
            alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
// 3
            child: CachedNetworkImage(
              imageUrl: 
'https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/d5NXSklXo0qyIYkgV94XAgMIckC.j
pg',
              alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
              fit: BoxFit.fitWidth,
              height: 200,
              width: screenWidth,
            ),
          ),
// 4
          Align(
            alignment: Alignment.bottomLeft,
            child: Padding(
              padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 24.0, bottom: 8),
              child: Column(
                mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
                crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                children: [
                  Text(
                    'Dune',
                    style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.headlineLarge,

--- Page 270 ---
                  ),
                  addVerticalSpace(4),
                  Text(
                    '2024',
                    style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium,
                  ),
                ],
              ),
            ),
          )
        ]),
      ),
    );
Here, we are using a Stack widget to show an image and overlay that
with the title and year. We use the Align widget to position the image at
the top center and the text in the bottom left of the 200 high box. A
detailed explanation of key lines are as follows:
1. Use MediaQuery to get the width of the screen.
2. Use the Stack widget to wrap all of the widgets in the list on top of
each other.
3. Show a hard-coded detail image.
4. Use the Align widget to position the text in the bottom left corner.
13. Back in MovieDetail, replace all the code below the children:
[ with:
           children: [
              Expanded(
                child: CustomScrollView(slivers: [
                  SliverList(
                    delegate: SliverChildListDelegate([
                      Stack(children: [DetailImage()]),
                    ]),
                  ),

--- Page 271 ---
                ]),
              )
            ],
          ),
        ),
      ),
    );
This wraps a CustomScrollView with an Expanded and uses a
SliverList.
14. Right now, the stack just has our DetailImage widget. Hot restart.
You should see the following:
Figure 8.14: Detail two

--- Page 272 ---
15. The next row will be the genre chips. Since we wrote the genre screen
earlier, we have a list of genres we can use. Open up
providers.dart and add:
@riverpod
List<GenreState> genres(GenresRef ref) =>  [
  GenreState(genre: ‘Action’, isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: ‘Adventure’, isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: ‘Crime’, isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: ‘Mystery’, isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'War', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Comedy', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Romance', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'History', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Music', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Drama', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Thriller', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Family', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Horror', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Western', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Science Fiction', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Animation', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Documentation', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'TV Movie', isSelected: false),
  GenreState(genre: 'Fantasy', isSelected: false),
];
This will add a provider for genres.
16. In the terminal window run the builder command:
dart run build_runner build
17. Open up genre_screen.dart and remove the initState
method and the genres list. Then in the build method after the images
variable add:
    final genres = ref.read(genresProvider);
18. Import the providers.dart file. In the move_detail folder

--- Page 273 ---
create a new file genre_row.dart. This will show a list of genres
for a particular movie. Add a simple StatelessWidget for showing
a list of genres:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
import ‘package:movies/ui/genres/genre_section.dart’;
class GenreRow extends StatelessWidget {
  final List<GenreState> genres;
  const GenreRow({super.key, required this.genres});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Padding(
      padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0, top: 24, bottom: 16),
      child: SizedBox(
        height: 34,
// 1
        child: ListView(
          scrollDirection: Axis.horizontal,
// 2
          children: genres
              .map((genre) => Container(
            margin: const EdgeInsets.only(right: 8),
            padding:
            const EdgeInsets.symmetric(horizontal: 8, vertical: 4),
// 3
            decoration: BoxDecoration(
              color: buttonGrey,
              borderRadius: BorderRadius.circular(12),
            ),
// 4
            child: Text(
              genre.genre,
              style: Theme.of(context)

--- Page 274 ---
                  .textTheme
                  .bodyLarge
                  ?.copyWith(color: Colors.white),
            ),
          ))
              .toList(),
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
}
This widget shows a horizontal list of grey-colored rectangles with the
genre name inside. The description of key lines are as follows:
a. A horizontal list.
b. Use the map function of a list to generate a list of widgets (Note that
you need to follow the map function with a toList() call or it
will not work).
c. Draw a grey rounded background.
d. Display the genre name.
19. Back in movie_detail.dart, add the provider for genres at the
beginning of the build method:
    final genres = ref.read(genresProvider);
20. Import the providers.dart file. Then add the GenreRow class
after the Stack:
    GenreRow(genres: genres),
Here is what the screen looks like (Figure 8.15):

--- Page 275 ---
Figure 8.15: Detail three
While this shows all genres, we will change this once we have real data.
The next row is the movie description.
21. Create a new file called movie_overview.dart in the
movie_detail folder. Add the following:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
class MovieOverview extends StatelessWidget {
  final String details;
  const MovieOverview({super.key, required this.details});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Padding(
      padding: const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(16, 0, 16, 24),
      child: Text(

--- Page 276 ---
        details,
        style: body1Regular,
      ),
    );
  }
}
This just shows a Text description. While we could have put this in the
detail class, creating another class will make the overall readability
of the class much better.
22. Add the MovieOverview class below GenreRow in
MovieDetails with:
MovieOverview(details: 'Follow the mythic journey of Paul Atreides as 
he unites with Chani and the Fremen while on a path of revenge against 
the conspirators who destroyed his family. Facing a choice between the 
love of his life and the fate of the known universe, Paul endeavors to 
prevent a terrible future only he can foresee.'),
Your screen should now look as follows:

--- Page 277 ---
Figure 8.16: Detail four
23. The next row is the favorites row. For this app, we will only be
implementing the favorite button and will give you the chance to
implement the rate and share buttons on your own. Next, create a new
file named text_icon.dart in the ui/widgets folder. This
widget will just show an IconButton and text below it. We will reuse
this widget in several places, so it makes sense to add it to the
widgets folder. Add the following code:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
class TextIcon extends StatelessWidget {
  final Text text;
  final IconButton icon;
  const TextIcon({super.key, required this.text, required this.icon});

--- Page 278 ---
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Column(
      mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
      children: [
        icon,
        addVerticalSpace(4),
        text,
      ],
    )
    ;
  }
}
This just uses a Column to show an Icon and Text widget.
24. Next, create a new file named button_row.dart in the
movie_detail folder. Add:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/widgets/text_icon.dart';
typedef OnFavoriteSelected = void Function();
class ButtonRow extends StatelessWidget {
  final bool favoriteSelected;
  final OnFavoriteSelected onFavoriteSelected;
  const ButtonRow({
    super.key,
    required this.favoriteSelected,
    required this.onFavoriteSelected,
  });
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // TODO Add Row
  }
}

--- Page 279 ---
This will be a Row of three buttons.
25. Next, add the Row:
    return Padding(
      padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0, top: 0, bottom: 32),
      child: Row(
        mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
        mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,
        children: [
// 1
          TextIcon(
            text: Text(
              'Favorite',
              style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelSmall,
            ),
// 2
            icon: IconButton(
              onPressed: () {
                onFavoriteSelected();
              },
// 3
              icon: Icon(
                favoriteSelected ? Icons.favorite_outlined : 
Icons.favorite_border,
                color: favoriteSelected ? Colors.red : Colors.white,
              ),
            ),
          ),
          addHorizontalSpace(32),
          TextIcon(
            text: Text(
              'Rate',
              style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelSmall,
            ),
            // TODO For you to implement

--- Page 280 ---
            icon: IconButton(
              onPressed: () {},
              icon: const Icon(
                Icons.thumb_up_alt_outlined,
                color: Colors.white,
              ),
            ),
          ),
          addHorizontalSpace(32),
          TextIcon(
            text: Text(
              'Share',
              style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelSmall,
            ),
            // TODO For you to implement
            icon: IconButton(
              onPressed: () {},
              icon: const Icon(
                Icons.ios_share,
                color: Colors.white,
              ),
            ),
          ),
        ],
      ),
    );
The last two icons have been left for you to implement. In this code, we
performed the following functions:
a. Used the TextIcon widget for the favorite widget.
b. When the user selects the icon, call the onFavoriteSelected
callback.
c. Show a different favorite icon depending on if it is selected.
26. Back in MovieDetail, add a notifier as the first line in the build
method for when the user selects the favorite icon:

--- Page 281 ---
  final favoriteNotifier = ValueNotifier<bool>(false);
This is a widget that will rebuild just its child when the value changes.
27. After the MovieOverview widget add the following code:
                      ValueListenableBuilder<bool>(
                        valueListenable: favoriteNotifier,
                        builder:
                            (BuildContext context, bool value, Widget? child) {
                          return ButtonRow(
                            favoriteSelected: favoriteNotifier.value,
                            onFavoriteSelected: () async {
                              if (favoriteNotifier.value) {
                                favoriteNotifier.value = false;
                              } else {
                                favoriteNotifier.value = true;
                              }
                            },
                          );
                        },
                      ),
This listens for changes to the notifier, which is set in the
onFavoriteSelected method. Hot reload and test the favorite
button. Clicking on it should turn it red, as shown in Figure 8.17:

--- Page 282 ---
Figure 8.17: Detail five
28. The next section is the trailer section. This will show a horizontal list
of movie trailers for the current movie. Open the utls.dart file and
add:
typedef OnMovieVideoTap = void Function(String video);
This will be a callback function with the string of the video.
29. In the movie_detail folder create a new file named
trailer.dart. Add:

--- Page 283 ---
import 'package:auto_size_text/auto_size_text.dart';
import 'package:cached_network_image/cached_network_image.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
class Trailer extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  final List<String>? movieVideos;
  final OnMovieVideoTap onVideoTap;
  const Trailer({this.movieVideos, required this.onVideoTap, 
super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<Trailer> createState() => _TrailerState();
}
class _TrailerState extends ConsumerState<Trailer> {
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
// TODO Add widgets
  }
}
30. Next, add the widgets at the TODO. The code is as follows:
// 1
    if (widget.movieVideos == null) {
      return Container();
    }
    return Padding(
      padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0, right: 16),
// 2
      child: SizedBox(
        height: 120,
// 3
        child: ListView.builder(
          itemExtent: 166,
          scrollDirection: Axis.horizontal,

--- Page 284 ---
          // Ensure horizontal scrolling within the list
          itemCount: widget.movieVideos!.length,
          itemBuilder: (context, index) {
            final movieVideo = widget.movieVideos![index];
// 4
            return GestureDetector(
              onTap: () {
                widget.onVideoTap(movieVideo);
              },
              child: Padding(
                padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 4.0, right: 4.0),
                child: SizedBox(
                  width: 166,
                  child: Column(
                    mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
                    crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                    mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                    children: [
// 5
                      CachedNetworkImage(
                        httpHeaders: const {'Access-Control-Allow-Origin': '*'},
                        imageUrl: movieVideo,
                        alignment: Alignment.topLeft,
                        // fit: BoxFit.fitWidth,
                        fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                        height: 98,
                        // width: 200,
                        // width: 142,
                      ),
// 6
                      AutoSizeText(
                        'Dune',
                        style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelSmall,

--- Page 285 ---
                        maxLines: 1,
                        minFontSize: 10,
                        overflow: TextOverflow.ellipsis,
                      ),
                    ],
                  ),
                ),
              ),
            );
          },
        ),
      ),
    );
This will display a horizontal list of trailer movies. Here is a description
of the code:
a. First, check to make sure there were videos passed in. It is possible
for some movies to not have trailers. A Container is used for an
empty widget.
b. Make sure the height is fixed at 120 pixels.
c. Use a ListView.builder method where each item is 166 pixels
high.
d. Use a GestureDetector to send the video to the callback.
e. Show the thumbnail image. The httpHeaders are to allow this to
work on the web.
f. Show the text of the trailer below the image. This will contain real
data in later chapters.
31. Back in MovieDetails, add the Trailer class below the favorite
row:
                      Padding(
                        padding: const EdgeInsets.only(
                            left: 16, bottom: 8),
                        child: Text('Trailers', style: Theme. 
of(context).textTheme.headlineLarge),

--- Page 286 ---
                      ),
                      Trailer(
                        movieVideos: 
['https://img.youtube.com/vi/U2Qp5pL3ovA/hqdefault.jpg'],
                        onVideoTap: (video) {
                          context.router
                              .push(VideoPageRoute(movieVideo: 
'U2Qp5pL3ovA'));                        },
                      ),
After some padding, and the Trailers text, we hard-code the thumbnail
image and the video URL for now. Hot restart. The detail screen now
looks as follows:
Figure 8.18: Detail six
Click on the trailer and you should be taken to the video. You can

--- Page 287 ---
change the orientation to display the video better. Click on the back
arrow to return.
32. The last element is the cast list. This will be a grid with the avatars of
each cast member. In the widgets folder, create a new file named
cast_image.dart. Add:
import 'package:cached_network_image/cached_network_image.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
import 'package:auto_size_text/auto_size_text.dart';
class CastImage extends StatelessWidget {
  final String imageUrl;
  final String name;
  const CastImage({super.key, required this.imageUrl, required 
this.name});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // TODO Add widgets
  }
  // TODO Add getAvatar
}
This widget will take a URL for the image of the cast member and a
name.
33. Now add the getAvatar method below the build method:
Widget getAvatar() {
    if (imageUrl.isNotEmpty) {
      return CircleAvatar(
          backgroundImage: CachedNetworkImageProvider(
            imageUrl,
            maxHeight: 76,
            maxWidth: 76,
          ));
    } else {

--- Page 288 ---
      return const CircleAvatar(
          backgroundColor: buttonGrey,
          child: Icon(Icons.person, size: 76.0, color: Colors.black,));
    }
  }
This method uses a Flutter CircularAvatar widget to show an
image in a circular shape. If there is no URL, show a grey circle.
34. Next, fill in the build method:
    return Column(
      mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
      crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.center,
      mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.center,
      children: [
        SizedBox(
          width: 76,
          height: 78,
          child: getAvatar(),
        ),
        addVerticalSpace( 4),
        Align(
          alignment: Alignment.center,
          child: AutoSizeText(
            name,
            style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelSmall,
            maxLines: 1,
            overflow: TextOverflow.ellipsis,
          ),
        ),
      ],
    );
This is just a column with the avatar and the name below that.
35. Now that we have the widget for the image, we need a widget to show
a grid of widgets. Create a new file in the widgets folder named

--- Page 289 ---
horiz_cast.dart. Add:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/widgets/cast_image.dart';
class HorizontalCast extends ConsumerWidget {
  final List<String> castList;
  const HorizontalCast({required this.castList, super.key});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context, WidgetRef ref) {
    return SliverPadding(
      padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0, right: 16),
      sliver: SliverGrid(
        gridDelegate: const SliverGridDelegateWithMaxCrossAxisExtent(
            maxCrossAxisExtent: 100.0,
            mainAxisSpacing: 16,
            crossAxisSpacing: 16,
            mainAxisExtent: 100.0),
        delegate: SliverChildBuilderDelegate((BuildContext context, int 
index) {
          return CastImage(imageUrl: 
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/BE2sdjpgsa2rNTFa66f7upkaOP.jpg', 
name: 'Timothée Chalamet');
        }, childCount: castList.length),
      ),
    );
  }
}
This widget uses a few slivers: SliverPadding and SliverGrid.
It then returns the CastImage widget we created earlier with a hard-
coded URL and name. We are hard-coding the main actor for now.
36. Back in MovieDetails, add the HorizontalCast widget after
the SliverList. This is important: If you add it in the
SliverChildListDelegate list it will not work. Add the

--- Page 290 ---
following:
                  HorizontalCast(castList: ['', '']),
This will show two of the same cast members. Again, once we get real
data, we will show all the cast members.
DeepLink testing
Now that we have the details page finished, we need to test deep linking.
Android
Open up app/src/main/AndroidManifest.xml. Here is the
following code:
            <intent-filter>
                <action 
android:name=»android.intent.action.MAIN»/>
                <category 
android:name="android.intent.category.LAUNCHER"/>
            </intent-filter>
Add the following:
            <meta-data
                
android:name="flutter_deeplinking_enabled"
                android:value="true" />
            <intent-filter 
android:autoVerify="true">
                <action 
android:name="android.intent.action.VIEW" />
                <category 
android:name="android.intent.category.DEFAULT" />
                <category 
android:name="android.intent.category.BROWSABLE" />

--- Page 291 ---
                <data android:scheme="movieapp" 
android:host="bpb.com"/>
            </intent-filter>
This will add a custom scheme of movieapp to the Android app. Stop and
rerun the Android app.
From the terminal, type the following:
adb shell 'am start -a android.intent.action.VIEW \
  -c android.intent.category.BROWSABLE \
  -d "movieapp://bpb.com/details/1"' \
com.bpb.movies/.MainActivity
This will send a message to the app to deal with the custom scheme
movieapp and go to the details page.
iOS
For iOS, make sure you follow the instructions above to add the associated
domains and the custom scheme to the info.plist. Then in a terminal
type:
xcrun simctl openurl booted 'movieapps://bpb.com/details/1
You will be able to see the details page.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about navigation and how to use it with just the
Flutter widgets and with third-party packages. You now have the ability to
navigate from page to page and control what the user sees. You built up the
Movie detail page with lots of widgets to display different parts of the
screen.
In the next chapter, you will learn about animations and transitions. You will
learn about implicit and explicit animations as well as Hero animations and
add page transitions to each page.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:

--- Page 292 ---
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 293 ---
CHAPTER 9
Animations and Transitions
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn all about the built-in animations that Flutter
provides, as well as some third-party packages for handling transitions and
animations. You will start out with some of the easier pre-built animation
widgets and then customize your own. Finally, you will build some amazing
animations for the movie app.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Basic animation concepts
• Advanced animation techniques
• Animation widgets
• Custom animations
• Animation libraries and tools
• Movie app
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding for how
animations work in Flutter. You will be able to build you own animations as

--- Page 294 ---
well as create custom animations. You will understand how to create
animations and where to put them. You will learn about third-party
packages for animations. Your movie app will look great as you move from
page to page.
Basic animation concepts
Animations in Flutter are made up of a few different types of animations,
including drawing-based, which uses graphics, and code-based, which
focuses on widget layouts and styles. For code-based animations, there are
two different types: implicit and explicit. Implicit animations are just
animations that change the values of another widget, while explicit use an
animation controller to explicitly tell it when and how to run.
Implicit animations
Implicit animations give you less control than explicit animations but are
easier to use. These widgets are of the type: AnimatedXXXX, where XXX
could be a Container, opacity, positioning, padding, or any other attribute of
a widget. All of these classes extend the
ImplicitlyAnimatedWidget class. If Flutter does not have one
already made for you, you can create your own. A very simple instance of
an AnimatedContainer looks as follows:
AnimatedContainer(
    duration: const Duration(milliseconds: 2000),
    curve: Curves.easeInOut,
    decoration: BoxDecoration(
         color: selected ? Colors.blue : Colors.red,
         border: Border.all(
            color: Colors.black,
            width: 2,
         ),
    ),
    child: Container(),
),

--- Page 295 ---
There are two required parameters: duration, which defines how long the
animation will run and the child, which will be the widget that is animated.
This will show up as either a blue or red square that animates to the other
color (Figure 9.1). Not shown is the onTap method that changes the
selected value, causing the animation to start. It has a two-second duration
and uses an easeInOut curve (explained as follows):
Figure 9.1: AnimatedContainer
Besides the color, you can animate the other properties of a container, like
width and height. There are many more animated widgets. The following
are a few examples:
• AnimatedAlign
• AnimatedOpacity
• AnimatedPadding
• AnimatedPositioned

--- Page 296 ---
• AnimatedSize
• AnimatedScale
• AnimatedRotation
• AnimatedSlide
• AnimatedIcon
• AnimatedCrossFade
• AnimatedSwitcher
These widgets modify their respective properties to change the underlying
widget. Opacity will cause the widget to fade in and out.
AnimatedPositioned is just like its Positioned widget and can
only work inside of a Stack and move the widget inside of the Stack. Size
and Scale animate the change in the size and scale of a widget. If you need
to just perform one type of animation, then these widgets are a great
solution. For more complex animations, you will need to use an implicit
animation.
Tween animations
If you cannot find an animation that does what you need and you want to
change a property of a widget, you can use the
TweenAnimationBuilder This widget uses a Tween class (like in-
between) that has begin and end parameters for going from one property
value to another.
The following is a TweenAnimationBuilder that animates the colors
of a square:
TweenAnimationBuilder<Color?>(
              duration: const 
Duration(milliseconds: 2000),
              tween: ColorTween(begin: const 
Color(0xFF0D47A1), end: const Color(0xFFB71C1C)),
              curve: Curves.easeInOut,
              builder: (context, value, child) {
                return Container(

--- Page 297 ---
                  decoration: BoxDecoration(
                    color: value,
                    border: Border.all(
                      color: Colors.black,
                      width: 2,
                    ),
                  ),
                );
              },
            ),
This is similar to the previous example. Note that to use a ColorTween,
we had to specify a nullable Color for the builder type. Another type of
builder is with a double value that translates (or moves) a square across the
screen. The code is as follows:
            TweenAnimationBuilder<double>(
              duration: const 
Duration(milliseconds: 2000),
              tween: Tween(begin: 0.0, end: 1.0),
              child: Container(
                width: 120,
                height: 120,
                color: 
Theme.of(context).primaryColor,
              ),
              builder: (context, value, child) {
                return Transform.translate(
                  offset: Offset(value * 200 - 
100, 0),

--- Page 298 ---
                  //angle: 0.5 * pi * value,
                  child: child,
                );
              },
            ),
This just moves the square from the left side of the screen to the right side
of the screen. If you use the child passed in the builder, you will improve
performance as that entire widget tree does not have to be rebuilt each time.
Advanced animation techniques
If you need to do more than the basics, you need to learn more advanced
animation techniques. We will cover explicit animations, specifically the
animation controller. These animations are a bit more complex but allow
you to create amazing movement in your app.
Explicit animations
Explicit animations give you more control over your animations but are a
bit more complex. Explicit animations are named that way because you, or
the user, tell it when to start and stop using an animation controller. If you
want to handle multiple animations at the same time, you will need an
animation controller.
AnimationController
An AnimationController is a class that controls the progression of
animations. It does this by producing a beginning and ending set of values
for the duration of the animation. So, the longer the duration, the smaller
the incremental values between the begin and ending values. The controller
can also stop, forward, and reverse an animation. In order to use an
AnimationController, you need to provide a Ticker. This ticker
handles notifying listeners of new values on every frame. There are several
mixins that provide this functionality and can be attached to a State class.
There are two key mixins:
• SingleTickerProviderStateMixin: For a single controller.

--- Page 299 ---
• TickerProviderStateMixin: For multiple controllers.
We will be adding both an animation controller and the mixin to several
classes to enable explicit animations. We will also need to change some
classes to Riverpod classes to access movie information. To make the
changes, make the following changes:
1. Open detail_image.dart. Currently, the detail page has a hard-
coded image. We will change that so that it will display the image
passed in. In order to do that, we will need to change the class from a
stateless widget to a stateful widget. Of course, we will use Riverpod’s
version: ConsumerStatefulWidget. Change the first two lines of
the class to:
class DetailImage extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  final String movieUrl;
  DetailImage({required this.movieUrl, super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<DetailImage> createState() => _DetailImageState();
}
class _DetailImageState extends ConsumerState<DetailImage> with 
SingleTickerProviderStateMixin {
2. Import the Riverpod package. Just add them with
SingleTickerProviderStateMixin, and that functionality is
automatically added. Next, change the hard-coded image URL to:
widget.movieUrl
3. Now that the DetailImage class is updated, open
movie_detail.dart and make the following changes. As the first
line in the build method add:
    final movies = ref.read(movieImagesProvider);
4. Here we get the list of movies. Then change DetailImage line to:
         Stack(children: [DetailImage(movieUrl: movies[widget.movieId])]),
5. To create an AnimationController you need to provide a
duration and a TickerProvider. Now add the controller next:
  late final AnimationController _controller = AnimationController(
    duration: const Duration(seconds: 2),

--- Page 300 ---
    vsync: this,
  );
6. Here, vsync is for the TicketProvider and this refers to the
State class with the mixin provided above. Add this as the first line
in the _DetailImageState class. Just as you need to dispose of a
TextEditingController, you need to dispose of an animation
controller. Add the following to the state class:
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
    _controller.forward();
  }
  @override
  void dispose() {
    _controller.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  }
The forward method starts the controller, then when the widget is disposed
of, dispose of the controller.
Animation
Now, a controller by itself does not do anything. We need an animation. An
animation is a very simple class that extends Listenable (used to notify
listeners of changes), and has a status (dismissed, forward, reverse, or
completed), and a value. Below the controller add the following:
  late final Animation<double> _animation = CurvedAnimation(
    parent: _controller,
    curve: Curves.easeIn,
  );
This is a curved animation. It just applies a curve to the animation and uses
the controller we created above. Another way to create this animation is
with the controller’s drive method. For example:

--- Page 301 ---
  late final Animation<double> _animation = 
_controller.drive(CurveTween(curve: 
Curves.easeIn));
What we want is for the detail image to fade in when the detail page shows.
To do that, we are going to use a FadeTransition widget. This
animates the opacity of the widget (that is, fade). This widget requires a
value for opacity and for that, we will use the animation we just created.
What this does is that every time the controller changes its value, it will
update the FadeTransition opacity and will slowly fade the image in.
Now wrap the CachedNetworkImage with the following code:
FadeTransition(
              opacity: _animation,
Open up home_screen_image.dart and change the onMovieTap
call to:
              onMovieTap(index);
Do a Hot Restart and go to the detail page. You should see the image
slowly fade in. You can change the speed of the fade by changing the
duration value of the controller.
Curves
A curve is a mathematical function that defines the rate of change of an
animation over time. It determines how the animated value (for example,
position, size, opacity) progresses from its starting point to its ending point.
If you do not use a curve, then all animations are linear, which may not feel
natural. There are many pre-built curves in Flutter. Some examples are as
follows:
• bounceIn: Oscillating Curve that grows.
• bounceOut: Oscillating Curve that shrinks.
• bounceInOut: Oscillating Curve that first grows and then shrinks.
• elasticIn: Oscillating Curve that grows and then overshoots its bounds.
• elasticOut: Oscillating Curve that shrinks and then overshoots its
bounds.
• elasticInOut: Oscillating Curve that shrinks and then grows while

--- Page 302 ---
overshooting its bounds.
AnimatedBuilder
An AnimatedBuilder is a general-purpose widget for building an
animation. This widget listens to changes in the animation and rebuilds its
widget. It has a builder method that returns the widget to animate.
Here is an example:
          AnimatedBuilder(
                  animation: _animation,
                  builder: (context, child) {
                    return CircularProgressIndicator(value: _animation.value);
                  },
                ),
This will draw a circular ring that starts at the top and goes clockwise
around.
Staggered animations
Staggered animations are a series of animations controlled by one
animation controller. Each animation happens one after the other or they
can overlap. An example of a staggered animation is one that shows a
square that transforms into a circle. The example showcases the following
output screen:

--- Page 303 ---
Figure 9.2: Staggered animation
The following is the example taken from the Flutter documentation. We will
start with the definition of the class that has the animations and the
controller:
class StaggeredAnimation extends StatefulWidget {
  const StaggeredAnimation({Key? key}) : super(key: key);
  @override
  State<StaggeredAnimation> createState() => 
_StaggeredAnimationState();
}
class _StaggeredAnimationState extends State<StaggeredAnimation>
    with SingleTickerProviderStateMixin {
  late AnimationController controller;
  late Animation<double> opacity;
  late Animation<double> width;
  late Animation<double> height;
  late Animation<EdgeInsets> padding;
  late Animation<BorderRadius?> borderRadius;
  late Animation<Color?> color;

--- Page 304 ---
}
Next, we initialize each of these animations:
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
// 1
    controller = AnimationController(
      duration: const Duration(milliseconds: 2000),
      vsync: this,
    );
// 2
    opacity = Tween<double>(
      begin: 0.0,
      end: 1.0,
    ).animate(
      CurvedAnimation(
        parent: controller,
        curve: const Interval(
          0.0,
          0.100,
          curve: Curves.ease,
        ),
      ),
    );
// 3
    width = Tween<double>(
      begin: 50.0,
      end: 150.0,
    ).animate(
      CurvedAnimation(
        parent: controller,
        curve: const Interval(
          0.125,
          0.250,

--- Page 305 ---
          curve: Curves.ease,
        ),
      ),
    );
// 4
    height = Tween<double>(begin: 50.0, end: 150.0).animate(
      CurvedAnimation(
        parent: controller,
        curve: const Interval(
          0.250,
          0.375,
          curve: Curves.ease,
        ),
      ),
    );
// 5
    padding = EdgeInsetsTween(
      begin: const EdgeInsets.only(bottom: 16),
      end: const EdgeInsets.only(bottom: 75),
    ).animate(
      CurvedAnimation(
        parent: controller,
        curve: const Interval(
          0.250,
          0.375,
          curve: Curves.ease,
        ),
      ),
    );
// 6
    borderRadius = BorderRadiusTween(
      begin: BorderRadius.circular(4),
      end: BorderRadius.circular(75),
    ).animate(

--- Page 306 ---
      CurvedAnimation(
        parent: controller,
        curve: const Interval(
          0.375,
          0.500,
          curve: Curves.ease,
        ),
      ),
    );
// 7
    color = ColorTween(
      begin: Colors.indigo[100],
      end: Colors.orange[400],
    ).animate(
      CurvedAnimation(
        parent: controller,
        curve: const Interval(
          0.500,
          0.750,
          curve: Curves.ease,
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
Here we have created the controller and each animation. An Interval has a
beginning and end time. These are values that depend on the time of the
controller. The following is a description of the steps:
1. Create an animation controller that lasts two seconds.
2. Define an opacity animation that goes from 0 to 0.10.
3. Create a width animation that goes from a width of 50 to 150 from
time 0.125 to 0.250.
4. Create a height animation that goes from a height of 50 to 150 from
time 0.250 to 0.375.

--- Page 307 ---
5. Create a padding animation that goes from a 16 to 75 from time 0.250
to 0.375.
6. Create a border animation that goes from a height of 4 to 75 from time
0.375 to 0.500.
7. Create a color animation that goes from indigo to orange from time
0.500 to 0.750.
Next is the build method. This has a Scaffold and when clicked starts
the animation:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
      appBar: AppBar(
        title: const Text('Staggered Animation'),
      ),
      body: GestureDetector(
        behavior: HitTestBehavior.opaque,
// 1
        onTap: () async {
          try {
            await controller.forward().orCancel;
            await controller.reverse().orCancel;
          } on TickerCanceled {
            // The animation got canceled, probably because we were disposed.
          }
        },
        child: Center(
          child: Container(
            width: 300,
            height: 300,
            decoration: BoxDecoration(
              color: Colors.black.withOpacity(0.1),
              border: Border.all(
                color: Colors.black.withOpacity(0.5),
              ),

--- Page 308 ---
            ),
// 2
            child: AnimatedBuilder(
              builder: (BuildContext context, Widget? child) {
                return Container(
                  padding: padding.value,
                  alignment: Alignment.bottomCenter,
                  child: Opacity(
                    opacity: opacity.value,
                    child: Container(
                      width: width.value,
                      height: height.value,
                      decoration: BoxDecoration(
                        color: color.value,
                        border: Border.all(
                          color: Colors.indigo[300]!,
                          width: 3,
                        ),
                        borderRadius: borderRadius.value,
                      ),
                    ),
                  ),
                );
              },
              animation: controller,
            ),
          ),
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
The AnimationBuider returns a Container with several of the
properties that we are changing in the animations. The animation starts
when the container is clicked. The following is a description of the steps:

--- Page 309 ---
1. Make the onTap asynchronous so that the controller can start and then
go backward.
2. Use the AnimationBuider to return the Container with all of
the different animation values.
Animation widgets
There are a few other animation widgets that we have not covered yet. The
first one is the AnimatedList. This widget is used for animating items
as they are inserted or removed from a list. Just like a ListView, it has an
itemBuilder method. This method takes a context, index, and an
additional animation parameter. This would look as follows:
 final GlobalKey<AnimatedListState> _listKey = 
GlobalKey<AnimatedListState>(); 
 AnimatedList(
key: _listKey,
        initialItemCount: movies.length,
        itemBuilder: (context, index, animation) {
          return buildItem(movies[index], animation); // Build each list item
        },
      ),
When an item is removed from the list (and setState is called), you
would then use the key to remove the item with an animation as follows:
    // Remove the item from the data list 
    setState(() {
      movies.removeAt(index);
    });
    // Remove the item from the AnimatedList with animation 
    _listKey.currentState!.removeItem(
      index,
          (context, animation) => buildItem(removedItem, animation),
    );

--- Page 310 ---
The next widget is the AnimatedSwitcher. This widget is for
transitioning between widgets with an animation. It provides a cross-fade
between the switching of widgets. It requires a duration and you can set the
in and out curves.
AnimatedPositioned is an animated version of Position (which is
used inside of a Stack). This widget will transition the widget in position
over time.
Hero animations
Hero widgets provide a transition between pages. Typically, you will have
an image (you can have other types of widgets) that will be in a location on
one screen and then animate to the new position on the next page. They are
very easy to use, just wrap the widget in a Hero widget and give it an
identical, unique, tag. This tag can be any object but it is important that they
be unique. In the movie app, we will use Heros to wrap the movie images.
On the home screen, there are duplicate images. For example, a movie
might be in the Trending section as well as the Popular section. We will
create a unique key based on the movie URL and the movie type. So, the
movie tag will be ‘movieUrl + movieType’. This will create a unique
tag.
The first task in creating Hero animations for the movie app is to separate
the image into its widget. Make the following changes:
1. In the widgets folder, create a new file called
movie_widget.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:cached_network_image/cached_network_image.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:movies/providers.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
// 1
enum MovieType {
  trending,
  popular,
  topRated,

--- Page 311 ---
  nowPlaying
}
class MovieWidget extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
// 2
  final int movieId;
  final String movieUrl;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  final MovieType movieType;
  const MovieWidget(
      {required this.movieId,
      required this.movieUrl,
      required this.onMovieTap,
      required this.movieType,
      super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<MovieWidget> createState() => 
_MovieWidgetState();
}
class _MovieWidgetState extends ConsumerState<MovieWidget> {
  late String uniqueHeroTag;
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
// 3
    uniqueHeroTag = widget.movieUrl + widget.movieType.name;
  }
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    // TODO Add Image
  }
}
This is the start of a widget for displaying an image. It uses a string to
create a unique tag from the movie URL and the movie type. The
important lines are as follows:

--- Page 312 ---
a. Define an enum for the different movie types.
b. The constructor takes the movie ID, URL, movie tap function, and
movie type.
c. Create a unique tag.
2. Now add the image as follows:
    return GestureDetector(
      onTap: () {
         widget.onMovieTap(widget.movieId);
      },
      child: Padding(
        padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
        child: SizedBox(
          width: 100,
          height: 142,
          child: Hero(
            tag: uniqueHeroTag,
            child: CachedNetworkImage(
              imageUrl: widget.movieUrl,
              alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
              fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
              height: 100,
              width: 142,
            )
          ),
        ),
      ),
    );
Here we are wrapping the image in a Hero widget with a unique tag.
When the user taps on the image, the callback will be executed.
3. Open up horiz_movies.dart. Add the following and replace the
constructor:
import ' package:movies/utils/utils.dart';

--- Page 313 ---
import ' package:movies/ui/widgets/movie_widget.dart';
class HorizontalMovies extends StatelessWidget {
  final MovieType movieType;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  final List<String> movies;
  const HorizontalMovies(
      {required this.onMovieTap, required this.movies, required 
this.movieType, super.key});
Just like the MovieWidget, we take a movie type and an
onMovieTap function.
4. Next, replace the code in the itemBuilder with the following:
return MovieWidget(movieId: index, movieUrl: movies[index], 
onMovieTap: onMovieTap, movieType: movieType,);
This just uses the movie widget we just created and passes the index
and that movie. We will be able to reuse this widget in other places.
5. Now, open home_screen.dart. Change the name of the image
variable to movies to better represent what they are:
   final movies = ref.read(movieImagesProvider);
6. Now change the three instances of HorizontalMovies with the
following three calls:
              HorizontalMovies(movies: movies, onMovieTap: 
onMovieTap, movieType: MovieType.Trending,),
              HorizontalMovies(movies: movies, onMovieTap: 
onMovieTap, movieType: MovieType.Popular,),
              HorizontalMovies(movies: movies, onMovieTap: 
onMovieTap, movieType: MovieType.TopRated,),
7. Now add the function for onMovieTap after the build method:
  void onMovieTap(int movieId) {
    context.router.push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: movieId));
  }
8. Import the movie_widget.dart file. Now, we want the detail page
to be the ending destination for our Hero. In order to do that, it needs to

--- Page 314 ---
know the hero tag. This is another good example of using Riverpod’s
providers. Open up providers.dart and add:
final heroTagProvider = StateProvider<String>((ref) {
  return '';
});
9. This creates a notifier provider class. In a terminal window run:
dart run build_runner build
This will allow classes to retrieve the current hero tag and for other
classes to set that tag.
10. Back in detail_image.dart, add the following line as the first
line in the build method:
   final heroTag = ref.watch(heroTagProvider);
11. This uses our provider to get the current hero tag. Now surround the
CachedNetworkImage with:
             child: Hero(
                tag: heroTag,
12. While we are changing things, open up
home_screen_image.dart and add a Hero. Change the
images variable to the following:
    final movies = ref.read(movieImagesProvider);
13. Then, change the itemCount to:
        itemCount: movies.length,
14. Change onMovieTap to:
              ref.read(heroTagProvider.notifier).state = movies[index] + 
'swiper';
             onMovieTap(index);
15. This will set the hero tag to the movie URL plus the string swiper and
pass in the index used. Wrap the CachedNetworkImage with a
Hero like:
            child: Hero(
              tag: movies[index] + 'swiper',

--- Page 315 ---
              child: CachedNetworkImage(
16. And the imageUrl as follows:
              imageUrl: movies[index],
17. Open up movie_widget.dart and add the following as the first
line in the onTap method:
        ref.read(heroTagProvider.notifier).state = uniqueHeroTag;
This will set the current hero tag. Perform a Hot restart and click on either
the main image or one of the images in the Trending list. Notice the
animation when you click on the image and it transitions to the detail page.
The last place that needs a Hero is the MovieRow class:
1. Open up movie_row.dart and first change the widget to a
ConsumerWidget (Riverpod’s version of a StatelessWidget):
class MovieRow extends ConsumerWidget {
  final int movieId;
  final String movieUrl;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  const MovieRow({required this.movieId, required this.movieUrl, 
required this.onMovieTap, super.key});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context, WidgetRef ref) {
This adds a few new parameters, as follows:
• movieId: The id of the movie.
• movieUrl: The URL of the movie.
• onMovieTap: Tap function.
2. Next, we need to create the hero tag. Replace:
    if (movie.isNotEmpty) {
      return GestureDetector(
        onTap: () => {},
3. with:
    late String uniqueHeroTag = movieUrl + 'MovieRow';
    if (movieUrl.isNotEmpty) {

--- Page 316 ---
      return GestureDetector(
        onTap: () {
          ref.read(heroTagProvider.notifier).state = uniqueHeroTag;
          onMovieTap(movieId);
        },
This will create a unique hero tag by adding the MovieRow string to
the URL. It will then set the tag when tapping on the image.
4. Next, wrap the CachedNetworkImage with a Hero:
                  child: Hero(
                    tag: uniqueHeroTag,
                    child: CachedNetworkImage(
                      imageUrl: movieUrl,
The calling class is VerticalMovieList.
5. Open up vert_movie_list.dart and change the images variable
to:
    final movies = ref.read(movieImagesProvider);
6. And the call to MovieRow with:
            movieId: index, movieUrl: movies[index], onMovieTap: 
onMovieTap,
Since we have modified VerticalMovieList, we need to modify
its caller.
7. Open up genre_screen.dart. Add the routes package:
import 'package:movies/router/app_routes.dart';
8. Change the onMovieTap to:
                    onMovieTap: (movieId) {
                      context.router.push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: 
movieId));
                    },
Perform a Hot restart and click on a movie in the genre screen. All these
Hero additions will cause the image to fly from its current position to the
top of the screen on the detail page.

--- Page 317 ---
Custom animations
If you want to create something truly unique that a traditional widget does
not provide, you can use a CustomPaint and CustomPainter classes.
The CustomPaint class provides a Canvas that you can use to draw
lower-level graphics like lines, arcs, circles, and rectangles. The Canvas
class is key to these types of animations. The Canvas class uses a few key
classes and methods, listed as follows:
• Paint: This class is used for setting the color and style for drawing.
• saveLayer: This method sets a rectangle that will be drawn into.
• restore: This method restores the canvas to a state before the
saveLayer call.
• drawCircle, drawRect, drawArc, drawOval, drawPath,
drawImage: Drawing methods.
• drawParagraph: Draw text.
• translate: Shift the coordinate space.
• scale: Add a scale to the current transform.
• clipRect, clipPath: Set the clip region.
There are more methods, but these are some of the key ones.
A CustomPaint class looks as follows:
CustomPaint(
    child: myWidget(),
    foregroundPainter: foregroundPainter(),
    painter: MyPainter(),
) 
The order of drawing is as follows:
• painter
• child
• foregroundPainter

--- Page 318 ---
So, there are three layers that are drawn. Both the painter and the
foregroundPainter can be null. Here is an example of a
CustomerPainter that draws a circle with a sun (Figure 9.3):
Figure 9.3: CustomPainter
The painter looks as follows:
class MyCustomPainter extends CustomPainter {
  @override
  void paint(Canvas canvas, Size size) {
    final paint = Paint()
      ..shader = RadialGradient(
        center: const Alignment(0.7, -0.6), // 
near the top right
        radius: 0.2,
        colors: [
          const Color(0xFFFFFF00), // yellow sun
          const Color(0xFF0099FF), // blue sky
        ],
        stops: const [

--- Page 319 ---
          0.4,
          1.0,
        ],
      ).createShader(Rect.fromCircle(
        center: Offset(size.width / 2, size.height 
/ 2),
        radius: size.width / 2,
      ));
    canvas.drawCircle(
      Offset(size.width / 2, size.height / 2),
      size.width / 2,
      paint,
    );
  }
  @override
  bool shouldRepaint(MyCustomPainter oldDelegate) 
=> false; // No need to repaint
}
The build method is as follows:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp(
      home: Scaffold(
        appBar: AppBar(title: const Text("Custom 
Paint Example")),
        body: Center(
          child: CustomPaint(

--- Page 320 ---
            size: const Size(200, 200),
            painter: MyCustomPainter(),
          ),
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
Another popular widget is the RotationTransition. This will rotate
another widget and uses an animation controller to define the animation.
ScaleTransition is similar but scales a widget larger or smaller. Like
the ScaleTransition, the SizeTransition widget changes the
size of a widget along a horizontal or vertical axis.
Animation libraries and tools
There are many different types of third-party animation packages. High-
level packages like Lottie and Rive require you to define an animation with
their tools and then run it in your app.
Lottie animations are JSON-based lightweight, scalable, and usable on
multiple platforms. They can be interacted with by the user. You will have
to pay to design the animations; however, free animations are available. You
can produce Lottie animations using other tools like Adobe After Effects,
Figma, etc. You can find it at https://lottiefiles.com/.
Rive Animations are similar to Lottie but require their own tool. You can
find it at https://rive.app/. Rive considers its tools to be smaller and faster
than Lottie’s.
Animation packages
There are many third-party packages that just perform animations. Some
popular ones are as follows:
• flutter_animate: Adds many effects to widgets.
• flutter_spinkit: Loading animations

--- Page 321 ---
• flutter_staggered_animations: Used to add animations to lists and
gridviews.
• Funvas: Create canvas-based animations based on time and math
functions
• simple_animations: Easily implement custom animations for common
use cases.
• Spring: A collection of 12 widgets based on spring animation effects.
We will use the flutter_animate package, which was written by the
author of the Wonderous App, to perform some nice animations.
Movie app
The first animation we will create is to modify the heart icon in the
ButtonRow class to beat like a heart when the user clicks on it.
1. Open up button_row.dart and first convert the class to a
StatefulWidget:
class ButtonRow extends StatefulWidget {
  final bool favoriteSelected;
  final OnFavoriteSelected onFavoriteSelected;
  const ButtonRow({
    super.key,
    required this.favoriteSelected,
    required this.onFavoriteSelected,
  });
  @override
  State<ButtonRow> createState() => _ButtonRowState();
}
class _ButtonRowState extends State<ButtonRow> with 
TickerProviderStateMixin {
The TickerProviderStateMixin allows this widget to handle
multiple controllers. (Remember you use a
SingleTickerProviderStateMixin).
2. Then add the animation variables:

--- Page 322 ---
  late AnimationController _sizeController;
  late Animation<double> _sizeAnimation;
  late AnimationController _colorController;
  late Animation<Color?> _colorAnimation;
3. There is one animation controller for the size, one controller for the
color and a size and color animation. Now initialize these variables:
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
// 1
    _sizeController = AnimationController(
      vsync: this,
      duration: Duration(seconds: 1), // Adjust pulse duration
    )..repeat(reverse: true); // Make animation repeat
// 2
    _sizeAnimation = Tween<double>(
      begin: 1.0, // Original size
      end: 1.5, // Scaled-up size
    ).animate(
      CurvedAnimation(parent: _sizeController, curve: 
Curves.easeInOut),
    );
// 3
    _colorController = AnimationController(
      vsync: this,
      duration: Duration(seconds: 1), // Adjust color change duration
    )..repeat(reverse: true);
// 4
    _colorAnimation = ColorTween(
      begin: Colors.white, // Starting color
      end: Colors.red, // Ending color
    ).animate(
      CurvedAnimation(parent: _colorController, curve: 

--- Page 323 ---
Curves.easeInOut),
    );
  }
  @override
  void dispose() {
    _sizeController.dispose();
    _colorController.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  } 
The size controller is a one second animation that repeats, and uses the
size animation. The color controller is a one second animation that
repeats, and uses the color animation. Here is an explanation:
a. Create the size controller. Notice the repeat command.
b. Create a size animation that starts at a scale of 1 and goes to 1.5.
c. Create the color controller.
d. Create a color animation that goes from white to red.
4. From the onPressed method on, replace the icon:
                widget.onFavoriteSelected();
              },
             icon: widget.favoriteSelected
                  ? AnimatedBuilder(
                      animation:
                          Listenable.merge([_sizeController, _colorController]),
                      builder: (context, child) {
                        return Icon(
                          Icons.favorite_outlined,
                          size: 21 * _sizeAnimation.value,
                          color: _colorAnimation.value,
                        );
                      })
                  : Icon(
                      Icons.favorite_border,

--- Page 324 ---
                      color: Colors.white,
                    ),
If the widget is selected, show the heart animation, otherwise show a
white outlined heart. This uses an AnimatedBuilder with two
controllers. It uses the merge method from the Listenable class to
return a list of controllers. Hot Reload and go into the detail page.
Click on the favorite button and you will see the animation start.
5. Now we can spice up the Genre Row and add some animation for
sliding the row of genres in. Open up genre_row.dart and first
convert the class to a StatefulWidget:
class GenreRow extends StatefulWidget {
  final List<GenreState> genres;
  const GenreRow({super.key, required this.genres});
  @override
  State<GenreRow> createState() => _GenreRowState();
}
class _GenreRowState extends State<GenreRow>
    with SingleTickerProviderStateMixin {
This uses a Single ticker mixin. Now add the needed variables:
  late AnimationController _controller;
  late Animation<Offset> _offsetAnimation;
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
    _controller = AnimationController(
      duration: const Duration(seconds: 2),
      vsync: this,
    )..forward(); // Start animation on initialization
    _offsetAnimation = Tween<Offset>(
      begin: const Offset(1.0, 0.0), // Start offscreen to the right
      end: Offset.zero, // End at the normal position
    ).animate(CurvedAnimation(
      parent: _controller,

--- Page 325 ---
      curve: Curves.elasticOut, // Use elastic curve for bounce effect
    ));
  }
  @override
  void dispose() {
    _controller.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  }
6. This creates a two second animation controller and an offset animation
that will start on the right side of the screen and go to the left. The
elasticOut curve will give it a bounce effect. Next, wrap the ListView
with:
    child: SlideTransition(
          position: _offsetAnimation,
7. Change the genres instance to:
widget.genres
Hot reload and you should see the row of genres animate from right to
left.
Flutter animate
The Flutter animate package (or flutter_animate) was written by the
author of the Wonderous app, which is a showcase for Flutter apps and
animations. You can find more information at:
https://flutter.gskinner.com/wonderous/. To use the package, open
pubspec.yaml and add:
  flutter_animate: ^4.5.0
Perform a Pub get. Make the following changes:
1. Now open up movie_widget.dart. Remember, that to use an
animation controller, your state class needs to use a ticker mixin. Add
the following to the end of the state class:
with SingleTickerProviderStateMixin
Then, add the following before the uniqueTag to create an animation
controller with a two second duration. The code is as follows:

--- Page 326 ---
  bool animateImage = false;
  late final AnimationController _controller = AnimationController(
    duration: const Duration(seconds: 2),
    vsync: this,
  );
Change the onTap method to:
      onTap: () {
        setState(() {
          ref.read(heroTagProvider.notifier).state = uniqueHeroTag;
          animateImage = true;
          _controller.forward();
        });
      },
This removes the onMovieTap call so that we can start the animation
by calling _controller.forward().
2. After the CachedNetworkImage widget add the following:
                .animate(
// 1
                    autoPlay: false,
// 2
                    controller: _controller,
// 3
                    onComplete: (controller) {
// 4
                      if (animateImage) {
                        animateImage = false;
                        widget.onMovieTap(widget.movieId);
                      }                    })
// 5
                .scaleXY(begin: 1.0, end: 1.1, duration: 600.ms)
// 6
                .then(delay: 600.ms)
// 7

--- Page 327 ---
                .scaleXY(begin: 1.1, end: 1.0, duration: 600.ms),
Import the flutter_animate package. This uses flutter_animate’s
animate class. Here is an explanation of the steps:
a. Use the autoPlay parameter to make sure the animation does not
start at first.
b. Set the controller.
c. Listen to the completion of the animation.
d. Reset the controller.
e. Scale the image up to 1.1 percent.
f. Wait for 600 milliseconds.
g. Scale the image back down to normal.
What this does is pulse the image before launching into the detail screen.
Hot Restart (reload may not work) and try clicking on a trending movie to
see the animation.
Custom routes
To add a transition animation between pages, the AutoRoute package has
a custom route class that will allow you to add an animation. Open up
app_routes.dart. Change the movie detail and video page route to:
        CustomRoute(
          path: '/details/:movieId',
          page: MovieDetailRoute.page,
          maintainState: false,
          transitionsBuilder: TransitionsBuilders.slideBottom,
          durationInMilliseconds: 500,
        ),
        CustomRoute(
          page: VideoPageRoute.page,
          maintainState: false,
          transitionsBuilder: TransitionsBuilders.slideRight,
          durationInMilliseconds: 500,
        ),

--- Page 328 ---
The first transition will slide in from the bottom, the second transition will
slide from the right. Do a Hot Restart (not reload). Try navigating to the
detail page and click on the trailer.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about all the available Flutter animation widgets
and how to use both implicit and explicit animations. There are many
different types of animations and the possibilities are limitless. As well as
the built-in animations, there are third-party animation packages that allow
designers to use tools to create animations and you can use those in your
apps. You learned about the important animation controller as well as the
animation classes it uses to create animations for the movie app.
In the next chapter, you will learn about Futures and asynchronous
programming, which will allow you to perform tasks in the background,
load data, and then handle the result. This will set you up for handling
networking and databases. You will also learn how to use networking
libraries to retrieve data from the internet. This will allow us to finally get
real movie data. You will also learn more about how to handle JSON data.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 329 ---
CHAPTER 10
Futures and Async/Await
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about asynchronous programming and how to
run code in the background. You will also learn about the classes that
Flutter provides to handle concurrency for a responsive UI and widgets that
handle these asynchronous classes. You will be able to load data in the
background and update the UI when it is finished.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Concurrency in Flutter
• Futures
• Async/await
• Event loop
• FutureBuilder
• Streams
• StreamBuilder
• Isolates
Objectives

--- Page 330 ---
By the end of this chapter, you will understand how to create asynchronous
functions and use them in your apps. You will know when to use a Future
and you will also understand the Dart keywords needed to use them.
Finally, you will build out the favorites screen and use Futures, streams, and
other asynchronous classes. You will be able to run tasks in the background
without slowing down the user interface.
Concurrency in Flutter
Concurrency is the ability of a language to process multiple tasks as if they
were running simultaneously. This is important because if you have code
running while the user is trying to use the screen, it will become
unresponsive. The system must balance drawing the UI, handling user
input, and background tasks. Typically, a program will run in one process
but can run code on different threads. Dart is a bit different. Dart uses the
concept of an isolate. An isolate is an independent execution unit with its
own memory heap and event loop. Memory cannot be shared between
isolates. This means the isolate does not have to worry about concurrency
problems like other languages. In exchange for this feature, communicating
between isolates is not easy. To communicate between isolates, messages
must be sent through send and receive ports. Flutter uses one main isolate to
run all code in. This includes an event loop to handle both regular UI work
and asynchronous tasks. You create asynchronous tasks by defining a
function that uses the async and await keywords. These keywords let
the Dart system know that the code will run asynchronously.
Futures
Futures are defined in Dart as an abstract class that represents a Future
value. You will usually use Futures as a return value on a function. This is
for functions that perform asynchronous operations. This might be a
network call, a database operation, or a long computation. Instead of
blocking the UI, you can define a method to return a value when it is done.
While the Future class is mostly an interface, the implementation is
complex. The main class is the _Future<T> class. This class has listeners
and implements all of the Future class’s functions. The Future class has a
few important methods, listed as follows:

--- Page 331 ---
• Future.value (value): Creates a Future with an already completed
value.
• Future.microtask (computation): Creates a Future that contains the
result of the computation and is run as a microtask.
• Future.delayed (duration, computation): Runs a computation after a
delay.
• Future.wait (List<Future>): Waits for all of the futures in the list to
complete.
• Future.then(function(value)): Calls the function with the value when
the Future is done.
• Future.doWhile (bool action()): Calls the action while the action
returns true.
• Future.asStream: Converts the result to a stream.
• Future.catchError(onError()): Handles errors emitted by the Future.
A Future has several different states, as follows:
• Incomplete: Starting state. Future is waiting for a result.
• StatePendingComplete: Set when completed.
• StateValue: Completed and contains a value.
• StateError: Completed with an error and stack trace.
Normally you would use Futures as return values. Functions can return a
Future without a type or with a specific type. You would use a Future
without a type when you just want to indicate you are done but do not have
a return value. For functions that return a result, you would create a
function as follows:
Future<String> loadRemoteString() async {
return network.getString();
}
Async/await
async and await are Dart keywords that work with Futures. async is
used after the definition of the function and marks the function as
asynchronous. If you use this keyword, your function must return a Future.

--- Page 332 ---
The await keyword is used inside a function and waits for the result of
another function. It will not continue until the result has returned. This is
important if you need to get a result before proceeding to the next call. You
do not have to use the await keyword in your function; you can just return
a Future. Remember, you can only use the await keyword inside an
async function. The following is an example of an async function that
retrieves data from the internet:
Future<String> _fetchData() async {
    final response = await 
http.get(Uri.parse('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1'));
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      final Map<String, dynamic> json = jsonDecode(response.body);
      _data = json.toString(); // Update state with the fetched data
      return _data;
    } else {
      throw Exception('Failed to load data');
    }
  }
This class uses the built-in http package to await the result of a call to the
internet and return a string result.
Event loop
Most UI frameworks work with an event loop. This is a continually running
system that listens for events and will continue until it gets an exit event.
The event loop runs on a single thread, and anything slowing this event
loop will make the UI seem unresponsive. The whole Flutter system is
started by the runApp method, starting from the main method. Events are
of the following types:
• User interactions: Pointer events (taps), Text input, and Focus.
• Lifecycle events: Events for widget lifecycle events.
• System events: Device orientation, battery, and platform channel
events.

--- Page 333 ---
Once these events are handled, the system checks for micro tasks and
executes them, and then the UI is rebuilt if needed. A microtask is a short,
high-priority function that will be run after the current event loop’s events
but before any asynchronous tasks.
FutureBuilder
FutureBuilder is a Flutter widget that uses a Future for data and
then a builder callback to return a widget based on the future data. This
widget looks as follows:
FutureBuilder(
        future: loadData(),
        builder: (context, snapshot) {
          if (snapshot.connectionState != ConnectionState.done) {
            return const NotReady();
          }
          return Placeholder();
        }
)
Future loadData() async {
return Future.value(data);
}
The FutureBuilder has a future parameter, our loadData
function, that returns a future and then a builder. This builder takes a
context and a snapshot. snapshot is a class of type AsyncSnapshot. This
class has three fields:
• data: When the future is finished, this field has the data.
• error: If there is an error, this field has the error.
• connectionState: Current state of the future.
The connection state has the following values:
• none: Null value.
• waiting: Operation is executing.
• active: Connected to an active data source, like a stream.
• done: Finished executing future.

--- Page 334 ---
The builder function can return different values depending on the
connection state.
To demonstrate Futures, we will start by creating a view model class to do
some of the logic for retrieving movies. This view model will return genres,
favorites, and movies. Instead of just referring to movies by the URL, we
need to create a class to hold all the information about a movie. To start out,
you need to create a new set of folders in the lib directory.
1. First, create a data folder and then a models folder inside of the
data folder. Inside the model's folder, create a new file named
movie.dart. Add the following:
class Movie {
  final int movieId;
  final String image;
  final String title;
  final String overview;
  final double popularity;
  final DateTime releaseDate;
  Movie({required this.movieId, required this.image, required this.title, 
required this.overview, required this.popularity, required 
this.releaseDate});
}
This holds the movie ID, image URL, title, overview (a description of
the movie), popularity value (will come from the next chapter), and
release date.
2. Next, in the ui folder, create a new file called
movie_viewmodel.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:movies/data/models/movie.dart'; 
class MovieViewModel {
  late List<String> movieGenres;
  List<Movie> trendingMovies = [];
  List<Movie> topRatedMovies = [];
  List<Movie> popularMovies = [];
  List<Movie> nowPlayingMovies = [];

--- Page 335 ---
  List<Movie> allMovies = [];
}
This contains a list of movie genres, trending, top-rated, popular, and
now-playing movies. The final field holds all of the movies.
3. Next, add the following methods:
  Future setup() async {
    await Future.wait([setupConfiguration(), setupGenres(), 
loadMovies()]);
  }
  Future setupConfiguration() async {
    // TODO add configuration
  }
  Future setupGenres() async {
    // TODO return list of genres
  }
  Future loadMovies() async {
   // TODO load movies
  }
The setup method uses Future’s wait method. Remember that this
method will wait until all methods have finished. The
setupConfiguration method will load in the movie
configuration, the setupGenres method will load all genres, and the
loadMovies method will load all movies.
4. In the setupGenres method, add the following:
    movieGenres = [
      'Action',
      'Adventure',
      'Crime',
      'Mystery',
      'War',
      'Comedy',
      'Romance',
      'History',

--- Page 336 ---
      'Music',
      'Drama',
      'Thriller',
      'Family',
      'Horror',
      'Western',
      'Science Fiction',
      'Animation',
      'Documentation',
      'TV Movie',
      'Fantasy',
    ];
This just sets a string list of genres. The next chapter will get the list
from a server.
5. Next, we will implement the loadMovies method by setting the
allMovies array to a list of hard-coded movies. For now, the only
items that matter are the movieId and the image URL. For
loadMovies add, the following:
    allMovies = [
      Movie(
          movieId: 1,
          image:
          
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/z1p34vh7dEOnLDmyCrlUVLuoDzd.j
pg',
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 2,
          image:
          

--- Page 337 ---
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/gKkl37BQuKTanygYQG1pyYgLVgf.j
pg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 3,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/4xJd3uwtL1vCuZgEfEc8JXI9Uyx.jpg
’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 4,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/uuA01PTtPombRPvL9dvsBqOBJWm
.jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 5,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/H6vke7zGiuLsz4v4RPeReb9rsv.jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',

--- Page 338 ---
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 6,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/e1J2oNzSBdou01sUvriVuoYp0pJ.jpg’
,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 7,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/hu40Uxp9WtpL34jv3zyWLb5zEVY.j
pg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 8,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/pKaA8VvfkNfEMUPMiiuL5qSPQYy.
jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(

--- Page 339 ---
          movieId: 9,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/zK2sFxZcelHJRPVr242rxy5VK4T.jpg
’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 10,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/7qxG0zyt29BI0IzFDfsps62kbQi.jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 11,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/8Gxv8gSFCU0XGDykEGv7zR1n2ua.
jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 12,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/zDi2U7WYkdIoGYHcYbM9X5yReV

--- Page 340 ---
D.jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 13,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/cxevDYdeFkiixRShbObdwAHBZry.jp
g’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 14,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/uXUs1fwSuE06LgYETw2mi4JxQvc.j
pg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 15,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/fdZpvODTX5wwkD0ikZNaClE4Ao
W.jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',

--- Page 341 ---
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 16,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/d5NXSklXo0qyIYkgV94XAgMIckC.j
pg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 17,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/sh7Rg8Er3tFcN9BpKIPOMvALgZd.j
pg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 18,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/sHJ2OIgpcpSmhqXkuSWxZ3nwg1S.j
pg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(

--- Page 342 ---
          movieId: 19,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/upKD8UbH8vQ798aMWgwMxV8t4y
k.jpg’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      Movie(
          movieId: 20,
          image:
          
‘http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/vfrQk5IPloGg1v9Rzbh2Eg3VGyM.jp
g’,
          title: 'Title',
          overview: 'Overview',
          popularity: 1.0,
          releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
    ];
This is the same list of image URLs we had earlier but with movie IDs.
When we get to the next chapter, we will load real data.
6. Next, add the getTrendingMovies method:
  Future<List<Movie>> getTrendingMovies(int page) async {
    if (trendingMovies.isEmpty) {
      trendingMovies = [
        allMovies[0],
        allMovies[2],
        allMovies[4],
        allMovies[6],
        allMovies[8],
        allMovies[10],
        allMovies[12],

--- Page 343 ---
      ];
    }
    return trendingMovies;
  }
This method just sets the trending movies list to the even-numbered
movies.
7. Do something similar for the getPopular method. Use the
following code:
  Future<List<Movie>> getPopular(int page) async {
    if (popularMovies.isEmpty) {
      popularMovies = [
        allMovies[1],
        allMovies[3],
        allMovies[5],
        allMovies[7],
        allMovies[9],
        allMovies[11],
        allMovies[13],
      ];
    }
    return popularMovies;
  }
This just uses the even-numbered movies.
8. For top rated, add:
  Future<List<Movie>> getTopRated(int page) async {
    if (topRatedMovies.isEmpty) {
      topRatedMovies = [
        allMovies[14],
        allMovies[16],
        allMovies[18],
        allMovies[1],
        allMovies[3],

--- Page 344 ---
        allMovies[5],
        allMovies[7],
      ];
    }
    return topRatedMovies;
  }
9. For now, playing add the following code:
  Future<List<Movie>> getNowPlaying(int page) async {
    if (nowPlayingMovies.isEmpty) {
      nowPlayingMovies = [
        allMovies[8],
        allMovies[10],
        allMovies[12],
        allMovies[14],
        allMovies[16],
        allMovies[18],
        allMovies[1],
      ];
    }
    return nowPlayingMovies;
  }
Now we need to make the view model available to other classes. That
means adding a provider in the providers’ file.
10. Open up providers.dart and remove the movieImages and
genres providers as these will come from the movie view model. Then
add the following:
import 'ui/movie_viewmodel.dart'; 
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<MovieViewModel> movieViewModel(MovieViewModelRef 
ref) async {
  final model = MovieViewModel();
  await model.setup();

--- Page 345 ---
  return model;
}
This creates a new view model and waits until the setup method has
finished. Only when this is complete will the view model be available.
Since this view model is not available right away, we have to use some
functionality from Riverpod to handle this.
11. In the terminal window run the build runner command:
dart run build_runner build
This will create the movie view model provider. You will now have
several errors in several files.
12. Open up home_screen.dart and in the state class, replace the
first three lines in the state class with:
  late MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  Future<List<List<Movie>>>? movieFuture;
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    final movieViewModelAsync = 
ref.watch(movieViewModelProvider);
    return movieViewModelAsync.when(
      error: (e, st) => Text(e.toString()),
      loading: () => const NotReady(),
      data: (viewModel) {
        movieViewModel = viewModel;
        return buildScreen();
      },
    );
  }
  Widget buildScreen() {
Import Movie and MovieViewModel. This uses Riverpod’s watch
method to get an asynchronous provider. We can then use the when
method to check for the following three possible conditions:
• error: An error has occurred.

--- Page 346 ---
• loading: The asynchronous provider is still running.
• data: The provider is ready.
Notice that Android Studio does not know what the NotReady widget
is. This is a very simple widget that just shows a circular progress bar.
13. In the widgets folder, create the file not_ready.dart. Add:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
class NotReady extends StatelessWidget {
  const NotReady({super.key});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return const Center(child: CircularProgressIndicator());
  }
}
We will reuse this widget a lot. Import that widget into HomeScreen.
Now that we have the view model, we can use it in the buildScreen
method.
14. Wrap the SingleChildScrollView widget (option-return on
Mac and choose “wrap with widget”) with a FutureBuilder.
FutureBuilder needs a future. Replace child:
SingleChildScrollView with:
        future: loadData(),
          builder: (context, snapshot) {
            if ((snapshot.connectionState != ConnectionState.active) &&
                (snapshot.connectionState != ConnectionState.done)) {
              return const NotReady();
            }
            return SingleChildScrollView(
loadData has not been defined yet.
15. Scroll down to the bottom of the method and find the parentheses for
the SingleChildScrollView. Change the comma to a semi-colon
and add a right bracket ‘}’. The ending should look like:
                ],

--- Page 347 ---
              ),
            ),
          );
        },
      ),
    );
16. Now, add the loadData method as the last method:
  Future loadData() async {
    movieFuture ??= Future.wait([
      movieViewModel.getTrendingMovies(1),
      movieViewModel.getTopRated(1),
      movieViewModel.getPopular(1),
      movieViewModel.getNowPlaying(1)
    ]);
    return movieFuture;
  }
This will wait until all futures have finished. This will get the first page
of trending, top-rated, popular, and now-playing movies. If you scroll
up, you will see errors with the HorizontalMovies widget.
17. Change the first HorizontalMovies to:
     HorizontalMovies(movies: movieViewModel.trendingMovies,
        onMovieTap: onMovieTap,
        movieType: MovieType.trending,),
This uses the view models trending movies list.
18. Do the same for the other calls:
     HorizontalMovies(movies: movieViewModel.popularMovies,
        onMovieTap: onMovieTap,
        movieType: MovieType.popular,),
19. Also add the following:
     HorizontalMovies(movies: movieViewModel.topRatedMovies,
        onMovieTap: onMovieTap,
        movieType: MovieType.topRated,),

--- Page 348 ---
You will notice that you will get an error here as well. This is because
HorizontalMovies expects a list of strings.
20. Open up horiz_movies.dart and change:
  final List<String> movies;
to:
  final List<Movie> movies;
21. Import the movie.dart file. Next, we see that MovieWidget
needs work. Command-click on MovieWidget to open the file.
Change the fields and constructor from:
  final int movieId;
  final String movieUrl;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  final MovieType movieType;
  const MovieWidget(
      {required this.movieId,
      required this.movieUrl,
      required this.onMovieTap,
      required this.movieType,
      super.key});
to:
  final Movie movie;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  final MovieType movieType;
  const MovieWidget(
      {required this.movie,
      required this.onMovieTap,
      required this.movieType,
      super.key});
22. Import movie.dart. Next, change the creation of the unique hero
tag to the following:
    uniqueHeroTag = widget.movie.image + widget.movieType.name;

--- Page 349 ---
23. Then change the following:
              imageUrl: widget.movieUrl,
to:
              imageUrl: widget.movie.image,
and,
                        widget.onMovieTap(widget.movieId);
to:
                        widget.onMovieTap(widget.movie.movieId);
Now that MovieWidget has changed, HorizontalMovies needs
to be updated.
24. Change the MovieWidget call to:
            return MovieWidget(movie: movies[index], onMovieTap: 
onMovieTap, movieType: movieType,);
The next change needed is the genre_screen.dart file. We need
to integrate the view model and not use the list of movies or genres.
25. Open up genre_screen.dart, and replace:
@override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    final images = ref.read(movieImagesProvider);
    final genres = ref.read(genresProvider);
with:
  late MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  List<GenreState> genreStates = [];
  List<Movie> currentMovieList = [];
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    final movieViewModelAsync = 
ref.watch(movieViewModelProvider);
    return movieViewModelAsync.when(
      error: (e, st) => Text(e.toString()),
      loading: () => const NotReady(),
      data: (viewModel) {

--- Page 350 ---
        movieViewModel = viewModel;
        buildGenreState();
        return buildScreen();
      },
    );
  }
  void buildGenreState() {
    genreStates.clear();
    for (final genre in movieViewModel.movieGenres) {
      genreStates.add(GenreState(genre: genre, isSelected: false));
    }
  }
  Widget buildScreen() {
26. Add all the imports. The beginning of the build method is just like
HomeScreen. The only difference is the buildGenreState
method. This just creates a list of genre states. Find the line:
       genreStates: genres,
and replace with:
       genreStates: genreStates,
and
       movies: images,
replace with:
       movies: currentMovieList,
As you can tell, when you make major refactoring changes like this, it
can require changes to multiple files. Ideally, you will develop models
before you write your app so you do not have to do major refactoring.
27. Now VerticalMovieList needs updating. Command-click to
open up VerticalMovieList. Change the following:
    final List<String> movies; 
to:
    final List<Movie> movies;
28. Import the Movie class. Change the MovieRow to:

--- Page 351 ---
          return MovieRow(
            movie: movies[index], onMovieTap: onMovieTap,
          );
We want to pass in the movie and not just the id. This way, the
MovieRow class has access to all the movie data.
29. Now open MovieRow. Change:
  final int movieId;
  final String movieUrl;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  const MovieRow({required this.movieId, required this.movieUrl, 
required this.onMovieTap, super.key});
To:
  final Movie movie;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  const MovieRow({required this.movie, required this.onMovieTap, 
super.key});
In the build method, change:
    late String uniqueHeroTag = movieUrl + 'MovieRow';
    if (movieUrl.isNotEmpty) {
      return GestureDetector(
        onTap: () {
          ref.read(heroTagProvider.notifier).state = uniqueHeroTag;
          onMovieTap(movieId);
        },
To:
    String uniqueHeroTag = movie.image + 'MovieRow';
    if (movie.image.isNotEmpty) {
      return GestureDetector(
        onTap: () {
          ref.read(heroTagProvider.notifier).state = uniqueHeroTag;
          onMovieTap(movie.movieId);
        },

--- Page 352 ---
Finally, change the following:
                      imageUrl: movieUrl,
to:
                      imageUrl: movie.image,
We are getting close to finishing. There are three more files that need
changing.
30. Open home_screen_image.dart. Change:
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  HomeScreenImage({super.key, required this.onMovieTap});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context, WidgetRef ref) {
    final movies = ref.read(movieImagesProvider);
to:
  final MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  HomeScreenImage({required this.movieViewModel, required 
this.onMovieTap, super.key});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context, WidgetRef ref) {
31. We no longer need the movie list. Next, after autoplay: true, change
the rest to:
        itemCount: movieViewModel.nowPlayingMovies.length,
        itemBuilder: (BuildContext context, int index) {
          final currentMovie = 
movieViewModel.nowPlayingMovies[index];
          String uniqueHeroTag = '${currentMovie.image}swiper';
          return GestureDetector(
            onTap: () {
              ref.read(heroTagProvider.notifier).state = uniqueHeroTag;
              onMovieTap(currentMovie.movieId);
            },
            child: Hero(
              tag: uniqueHeroTag,

--- Page 353 ---
              child: CachedNetworkImage(
                imageUrl: currentMovie.image,
                alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                height: 374,
                width: screenWidth,
              ),
            ),
          );
        },
      ),
    );
32. Return to HomeScreen and update the call to
HomeScreenImage:
   HomeScreenImage(movieViewModel: movieViewModel, 
onMovieTap: (movieId) {
        context.router.push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: movieId));
   }),
Now we just have the movie detail to fix.
33. Open up movie_detail.dart. Just like the other files, we need
the view model. After favoriteNotifier, replace:
@override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    final movies = ref.read(movieImagesProvider);
    final genres = ref.read(genresProvider);
with:
  late MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  List<GenreState> genreStates = [];
  late Movie currentMovie;
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    final movieViewModelAsync = 

--- Page 354 ---
ref.watch(movieViewModelProvider);
    return movieViewModelAsync.when(
      error: (e, st) => Text(e.toString()),
      loading: () => const NotReady(),
      data: (viewModel) {
        movieViewModel = viewModel;
        currentMovie = 
movieViewModel.findMovieById(widget.movieId);
        buildGenreState();
        return buildScreen();
      },
    );
  }
  void buildGenreState() {
    for (final genre in movieViewModel.movieGenres) {
      genreStates.add(GenreState(genre: genre, isSelected: false));
    }
  }
  Widget buildScreen() {
34. Add any needed imports. Find SliverChildListDelegate and
replace the following two lines with:
                      Stack(children: [DetailImage(movieUrl: 
currentMovie.image)]),
                      GenreRow(genres: genreStates),
Hot restart and everything should look the same.
Streams
Streams are a sequence of events that can have listeners to those events.
Those events are delivered asynchronously. There are two types of streams:
single and broadcast. Single streams can only be listened to by a single
listener, while a broadcast stream can be listened to by multiple listeners.
Be careful though, most streams are single streams. To get a broadcast

--- Page 355 ---
stream, you can call the asBroadcastStream method on a stream to
create a broadcast stream. This would look as follows:
  final broadcastStream = 
stream.asBroadcastStream(
    onCancel: (controller) {
       print('Stream paused');
       controller.pause();
     },
     onListen: (controller) async {
       if (controller.isPaused) {
         print('Stream resumed');
         controller.resume();
       }
     },
   );
You can create a regular stream in multiple ways:
• StreamController: If you have a StreamController, use the
stream getter.
• Factory methods:
o Stream.fromIterable: Returns a stream from a list.
o Stream.value: Emit a single value and close.
o Stream.periodic: Emit items at a specific interval.
o Stream.fromFuture: Convert a Future to a stream that emits one
value or an error.
• Create a function that emits a stream:
Stream<int> intStream(int to) async* {
  for (int i = 1; i <= to; i++) {
    yield i;  // Emit each value asynchronously
    await Future.delayed(Duration(seconds: 1)); // Optional delay

--- Page 356 ---
  }
}
Streams are very useful when you have a widget that is listening for
changes. For example, if you had a chat app, the screen would listen to a
stream of chat messages. If you are listening for location updates or sensor
data, many plugins provide this functionality. Google’s Firebase database
provides streams for the data from its servers.
To consume streams in a Flutter app, use a StreamBuilder widget or
listen to the stream. The listen method is defined as follows:
  StreamSubscription<T> listen(void onData(T event)?,
      {Function? onError, void onDone()?, bool? cancelOnError});
This method returns a StreamSubscription and takes an onData
function that receives the event and optional onError and onDone
methods. The cancelOnError flag will cancel the subscription on the
first error. The StreamSubscription has a cancel method. You can
also pause and resume the subscription.
StreamBuilder
This widget takes a stream and a builder. The builder also listens for the
connection state. An example is as follows:
StreamBuilder<List<Item>>(
          stream: getFavoriteStream(),
          builder: (context, snapshot) {
            if (snapshot.connectionState != 
ConnectionState.active) {
              return const NotReady();
            }
            return Scaffold();
         })
In place of the Scaffold, you would build out the widget with the items
given in the snapshot. You would get a list of the current items by using:

--- Page 357 ---
snapshot.requireData. This would be a list of the items returned in
the stream. Note that this does not have to be a list. It can be any type of
item.
To show how streams and StreamBuilder work, we will use them for
the favorites screen. We will start with a few widgets needed for the favorite
screen.
1. Start by creating a new file in the data/models folder named
favorite.dart. This will hold information about a favorite item.
Add the following:
class Favorite {
  final int movieId;
  final String image;
  bool favorite;
  final String title;
  final String overview;
  final double popularity;
  final DateTime releaseDate;
  Favorite({required this.movieId, required this.image, required 
this.favorite, required this.title, required this.overview, required 
this.popularity, required this.releaseDate});
}
This holds the movie ID, movie URL, whether it is a favorite or not,
title, overview, popularity, and release date.
2. Next, create favorite_row.dart in the widgets folder. Add the
following:
import 'package:auto_size_text/auto_size_text.dart';
import 'package:cached_network_image/cached_network_image.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/favorite.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/movie_viewmodel.dart';
class FavoriteRow extends StatelessWidget {
  final Favorite favorite;

--- Page 358 ---
  final MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  final OnFavoriteResultsTap onFavoritesTap;
  const FavoriteRow(
      {super.key,
      required this.favorite,
      required this.movieViewModel,
      required this.onMovieTap, required this.onFavoritesTap});
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
  }
}
This takes a favorite, the movie view model, an onMovieTap method,
and an onFavoritesTap method. This last method does not exist
yet.
3. Open up utils.dart and add the following code:
typedef OnFavoriteResultsTap = void Function(Favorite favorite);
Add the import. Next, fill out the build method with:
// 1
    final screenWidth = MediaQuery.of(context).size.width;
    final textWidth = screenWidth - 132;
    final imageUrl = favorite.image;
    if (imageUrl.isNotEmpty) {
      return GestureDetector(
        onTap: () => onMovieTap(favorite.movieId),
// 2
        child: SizedBox(
          height: 148,
          child: Row(
            mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.max,
            children: [
              addHorizontalSpace(16),

--- Page 359 ---
              SizedBox(
                height: 140,
                width: 100,
                child: CachedNetworkImage(
                  imageUrl: imageUrl,
                  alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                  fit: BoxFit.cover,
                  height: 140,
                  width: 100,
                ),
              ),
              addHorizontalSpace(16),
// 3
              Stack(
                children: [
                  Positioned(
                    top: 8,
                    right: 8,
                    child: IconButton(
                      onPressed: () => onFavoritesTap(favorite),
                      icon: favorite.favorite ? const Icon(
                        Icons.favorite_outlined,
                        color: Colors.red,
                      ) : const Icon(
                        Icons.favorite_border,
                        color: Colors.white,
                      ),
                    ),
                  ),
// 4
                  Column(
                      mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                      mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,

--- Page 360 ---
                      crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                      children: [
                        const Spacer(),
                        Column(
                          mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                          mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
                          crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                          children: [
                            SizedBox(
                              width: textWidth,
                              child: AutoSizeText(
                                'Title',
                                maxLines: 1,
                                minFontSize: 10,
                                style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelLarge,
                                overflow: TextOverflow.ellipsis,
                              ),
                            ),
                            addVerticalSpace( 4),
                            Text(
                              '1972',
                              style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium,
                            ),
                            addVerticalSpace( 4),
                          ],
                        ),
                      ]),
                ],
              ),
            ],
          ),
        ),
      );

--- Page 361 ---
    } else {
      return Container();
    }
These widgets perform the following functions:
a. Use MediaQuery to get the width of the screen. Set the width of the
text based on the screen width.
b. Use some SizedBoxes to set the row to be 148 pixels high.
c. Use a Stack to show the favorite icon at the top right.
d. Create a Column for the text.
4. Next, in the widgets folder, create a file named
vert_favorite_list.dart. Add the following code:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/favorite.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/movie_viewmodel.dart';
import 'favorite_row.dart';
class VerticalFavoriteList extends StatelessWidget {
  final List<Favorite> favorites;
  final MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  final OnFavoriteResultsTap onFavoritesTap;
  const VerticalFavoriteList(
      {super.key,
      required this.favorites,
      required this.movieViewModel,
      required this.onMovieTap,
        required this.onFavoritesTap,
      });
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return SliverList(
      delegate: SliverChildBuilderDelegate(

--- Page 362 ---
        (BuildContext context, int index) {
          return FavoriteRow(
            favorite: favorites[index],
            movieViewModel: movieViewModel,
            onMovieTap: (id) {
              onMovieTap(id);
            },
            onFavoritesTap: (favorite) {
              onFavoritesTap(favorite);
            },
          );
        },
        childCount: favorites.length, // Number of items in the list
      ),
    );
  }
}
This uses a SliverList to show a list of FavoriteRows.
5. Open up movie_viewmodel.dart. We will be using streams for
favorites. This will allow us to update the list of favorites in all areas.
Add the following after movieGenres:
  Stream<List<Favorite>>? favoriteStream = null;
  List<Favorite>? favoriteList = null;
After the loadMovies method add the creation of the favorite list:
  Stream<List<Favorite>> streamFavorites() {
    if (favoriteList == null) {
      favoriteList = [
        Favorite(
            movieId: 1,
            image:
                
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/z1p34vh7dEOnLDmyCrlUVLuoDzd.j

--- Page 363 ---
pg',
            favorite: false,
            title: 'Title',
            overview: 'Overview',
            popularity: 1.0,
            releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
        Favorite(
            movieId: 2,
            image:
                
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/gKkl37BQuKTanygYQG1pyYgLVgf.j
pg',
            favorite: false,
            title: 'Title',
            overview: 'Overview',
            popularity: 1.0,
            releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
        Favorite(
            movieId: 3,
            image:
                
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/4xJd3uwtL1vCuZgEfEc8JXI9Uyx.jpg'
,
            favorite: false,
            title: 'Title',
            overview: 'Overview',
            popularity: 1.0,
            releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
        Favorite(
            movieId: 4,
            image:
                
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/uuA01PTtPombRPvL9dvsBqOBJWm.

--- Page 364 ---
jpg',
            favorite: false,
            title: 'Title',
            overview: 'Overview',
            popularity: 1.0,
            releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
        Favorite(
            movieId: 5,
            image:
                
'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/H6vke7zGiuLsz4v4RPeReb9rsv.jpg',
            favorite: false,
            title: 'Title',
            overview: 'Overview',
            popularity: 1.0,
            releaseDate: DateTime.now()),
      ];
    }
    favoriteStream = Stream.value(favoriteList!);
    return favoriteStream!;
  }
This creates a list and then a stream using that list. However, what if we
want to update a favorite item? We can update the list and when the
stream is retrieved, the stream is updated.
6. Add a new method:
  void updateFavorite(Favorite favorite) {
    final index = favoriteList!
        .indexWhere((favItem) => favItem.movieId == favorite.movieId);
    if (index != -1) {
      favoriteList![index] = favorite;
    }
  }
This will find the favorite in the list and update it.

--- Page 365 ---
7. Open up favorite_screen.dart in the ui/favorites folder.
Replace the build method with:
  late MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  List<Favorite> currentFavorites = [];
  Sorting selectedSort = Sorting.aToz;
  final valueNotifier = ValueNotifier<List<Favorite>>([]);
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    final movieViewModelAsync = 
ref.watch(movieViewModelProvider);
    return movieViewModelAsync.when(
      error: (e, st) => Text(e.toString()),
      loading: () => const NotReady(),
      data: (viewModel) {
        movieViewModel = viewModel;
        return buildScreen();
      },
    );
  }
  Widget buildScreen() {
8. Add any needed imports. This uses the same method to retrieve the
view model. Next, add the following to the buildScreen method:
    return SafeArea(
      child: StreamBuilder<List<Favorite>>(
// 1
        stream: getFavoriteStream(),
        builder: (context, snapshot) {
          if ((snapshot.connectionState != ConnectionState.active) && 
(snapshot.connectionState != ConnectionState.done)) {
            return const NotReady();
          }
          return Scaffold(
            body: Container(

--- Page 366 ---
              color: screenBackground,
              child: Column(
                mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
                crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                children: [
                  Expanded(
                    child: CustomScrollView(
                      slivers: [
// 2
                        SliverList(
                          delegate: SliverChildListDelegate(
                            [
                              Padding(
                                padding: const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(
                                    16, 16.0, 0.0, 24.0),
                                child: Text('My Favorites', style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.titleLarge),
                              ),
                            ],
                          ),
                        ),
// 3
                        SortPicker(
                            useSliver: true,
                            onSortSelected: (sorting) {
                              selectedSort = sorting;
                              sortMovies();
                            }),
// 4
                        VerticalFavoriteList(
                          favorites: snapshot.requireData,
                          movieViewModel: movieViewModel,

--- Page 367 ---
                          onMovieTap: (movieId) {
                            context.router
                                .push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: movieId));
                          },
                          onFavoritesTap: (Favorite favorite) {
                            setState(() {
// 5
                              favorite.favorite = !favorite.favorite;
                              movieViewModel.updateFavorite(favorite);
                            });
                          },
                        )
                      ],
                    ),
                  ),
                ],
              ),
            ),
          );
        },
      ),
    );
Add any needed imports. The following is an explanation:
a. Call the getFavoriteStream method to return a stream of
favorites.
b. Use a SliverList to show a scrolling list of widgets.
c. Use our SortPicker widget to allow sorting.
d. Use the VerticalFavoriteList widget we created earlier.
e. Update whether the movie is a favorite or not.
There are a few methods that have not been implemented yet. Let us
add those next.
9. Next, create the stream with the following:

--- Page 368 ---
Stream<List<Favorite>> getFavoriteStream() {
    return movieViewModel.streamFavorites();
  }
10. Then, add the sort movies method. This just compares the titles,
popularity, or release date.
  void sortMovies() {
    if (currentFavorites.isEmpty) {
      return;
    }
    currentFavorites = currentFavorites.sorted((a, b) {
      switch (selectedSort) {
        case Sorting.aToz:
          return a.title.compareTo(b.title);
        case Sorting.zToa:
          return b.title.compareTo(a.title);
        case Sorting.rating:
          return b.popularity.compareTo(a.popularity);
        case Sorting.year:
          return a.releaseDate.compareTo(b.releaseDate);
      }
    });
    valueNotifier.value = currentFavorites;
  }
You will notice that there is an error in the sorted method. This method
is an extension that is part of the collections package.
11. Open up pubspec.yaml and add:
  collection: ^1.17.1
12. Do a Pub get, return to favorite_screen.dart, and import the
collection package. Finally, add the removeFavorite method:
  Future removeFavorite(Favorite favorite) async {
    setState(() {
      currentFavorites.remove(favorite);

--- Page 369 ---
    });
  }
Perform a Hot Reload, and you should see the favorites screen with a
list of movies. Try clicking on the heart. It should change to a filled
heart.
Isolates
As previously mentioned, Flutter runs in a single isolate. If you have a task
that will take a long time, like syncing a local database with a remote
database, using an isolate is your only solution. This will create a thread to
do work. However, communicating with a running thread requires the use
of Ports. Ports are used for communication between isolates with messages
sent using a SendPort and ReceivePort. You will usually create a
ReceivePort and use that port’s SendPort to send to an isolate. That
isolate can use the SendPort to send messages back to the caller. The
caller will listen for messages on the ReceivePort using the listen()
method. The following is a simple example:
import 'dart:isolate';
void main() async {
  final receivePort = ReceivePort(); 
  // Spawn a new isolate
  Isolate.spawn(isolateFunction, receivePort.sendPort);
  // Listen for messages from the isolate
  receivePort.listen((message) {
    print('Received: $message');
  });
}
void isolateFunction(SendPort sendPort) {
  sendPort.send('Hello from the isolate!'); 
}
The main function first creates the ReceivePort, then uses
Isolate.spawn with a reference to a function and the send port. If you
need to send more than just strings to an isolate, one way to handle this is to
convert data classes to JSON strings, send them via the send port, and then

--- Page 370 ---
de-serialize the JSON back into classes in the isolate. You can also pass
arguments to an isolate. The following is an example of a function sending
arguments to the isolate function:
  final receivePort = ReceivePort();
  final isolate = await Isolate.spawn<Map<String, 
dynamic>>(
    entryPoint,
    {
      'sendPort': receivePort.sendPort,
      'mapReference': <JSON string>
    },
    errorsAreFatal: true,
    debugName: 'RepositoryIsolate',
  );
void entryPoint(Map<String, dynamic> arguments) 
async {
  final sendPort = arguments['sendPort'] as 
SendPort;
  final sharedMap = arguments['mapReference'] as 
Map<String, dynamic>;
}
You can only send primitives, Lists, Maps, Sets, and SendPorts via
SendPort’s send method. This uses the Isolate.spawn method with a
Map<String, dynamic> (which is what JSON data is). The first
parameter is the function, and the second is the map with a send port and
the data. There are extra parameters that you can use for handling errors.
There are also onExit and onError parameters. The entryPoint
method gets the send port from the arguments and the data next (Note that
you can name the function anything you want). Here is an example of
listening to a receive port:

--- Page 371 ---
  receivePort.listen((message) async {
    if (message is String) {
       // Process message
    }
    // When done, you can kill the isolate
    isolate.kill();
  });
Remember that you cannot use fields or classes created outside of the
isolate. You will have to create new instances of them. Some packages, like
database handlers, do not like to have multiple instances of a database open
at the same time, so be careful when choosing your database.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about asynchronous functions and how to use
them in your apps. You used Futures, FutureBuilder,
StreamBuilder, and the async and await keywords needed to use
Futures. You learned about isolates and how they are useful. Finally, you
refactored your movie app to use these features and added the Favorites
screen to your movie app.
In the next chapter, you will use what you have learned in this chapter to
retrieve data from the internet. You will use Future and async functions
to download movie information to finally show real movie information in
your movie app.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 372 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 373 ---
CHAPTER 11
Networking
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn all about networking and start using The
Movie Database (TMDB) website to retrieve the latest movies. You will
learn how to asynchronously download data and update the screen with new
moves. You will learn about APIs and how to retrieve data from the internet
using networking packages.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Networking
• TMDB
• JSON and serialization
• Data models
• Networking packages
• Dio package
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding of how to
download data in the background and update the UI with that new
information. You will understand the JSON format, how to create models for

--- Page 374 ---
downloaded data, and how to put the data into those models. You will know
how to work with networking APIs and write code to use them. You will also
be able to use packages to create code to connect with APIs to download that
data. You will also learn about consuming data from other sites.
Networking
Cellular phones use WiFi and cellular data to handle networking. So far, the
movie app only has icons, images, and videos. All the icons come from the
Flutter framework, but the URLs we have used pull in images and videos
from the internet. The cached network image library uses networking calls to
download images in the background, and the pod_player package uses
networking to play videos. Now, we will learn how to download data
ourselves. We will still use a package to make things easier, but it is a lower-
level package that allows us to download information from other sites. Not
only can the package download images or videos, but the package allows us
to download anything we want. Flutter comes with its own package for
networking, but we will use a better third-party package. Most apps need to
be able to retrieve data from the internet. This is a critical part of your app
and should be written early in app development so that you can have data to
use for your UIs.
TMDB
We will be using the TMDB site to get information about movies. This site
allows you to freely use it for personal use. If you decide to use the app
commercially, you will need a paid account. You will need to create an
account and be approved, so make sure you put in a valid email address
when you sign up. Go to the TMDB site:
https://www.themoviedb.org/signup. You will see a sign-up form, as
shown in Figure 11.1. Enter all required information.

--- Page 375 ---
Figure 11.1: TMDB signup
Once you click on the signup button, you will receive an email to verify your
email, and shortly, you will be accepted. Once you have been accepted, you
will see your dashboard, as shown in Figure 11.2. Note that you are signing
up for the TMDB site that anyone can use to view movies.


--- Page 376 ---
Figure 11.2: TMDB dashboard
To go to the developer section, choose the More link and then the API link,
as shown in the following figure:
Figure 11.3: TMDB API Link
On the API site, you will need to create a developer API key. Click on the
Developer link:
Figure 11.4: TMDB API Key
On the next page, choose Mobile Application for the type, give your app
any name you want, and add an Application URL. The author is unsure

--- Page 377 ---
whether this field needs a valid website, as they entered their website here.
Finally, enter a summary and your information:
Figure 11.5: TMDB API key application
Once you select Submit, you will be taken to the API Key page, as shown in
the following figure. Copy the API Key since you will need it later.

--- Page 378 ---
Figure 11.6: TMDB API key overview
Click on the developer.themoviedb.org link, and you will be taken to the
Getting Started page, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 379 ---
Figure 11.7: TMDB API reference
Next, click on the API Reference menu, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 380 ---
Figure 11.8: TMDB Getting Started
To make sure your key works, click on the Try it! Button. You should see a
successful response as follows:


--- Page 381 ---
Figure 11.9: Success response
Scroll down the left list to the Movie Lists section and click on Now
Playing. This will show the Now Playing API:
Figure 11.10: TMDB Now Playing API
Click on the Try it! Button, and you should see a response.
JSON and serialization
The response above contains data in the JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON) format. It is the most widely used format for Representational
State Transfer (REST)-based APIs that servers provide. REST-based APIs
are standardized ways for systems to communicate. These consist of
stateless requests from a client to a server. That means that the server does

--- Page 382 ---
not remember previous calls. Most servers return data in JSON format.
JSON is easy to read and uses left “{“ and right “}” brackets with key/value
pairs. These values can have child entries as well. Dart and Flutter use JSON
extensively. What you will typically do is read in JSON and convert it into
class files so that your app can read that data easily. JSON supports a few
data types listed as follows:
• String: A value surrounded by quotes
• Number: An integer value (No quotes)
• Boolean: True or false
• null: Empty value
• Array: A list of items using “[“ “]”
• Object: A collection of key/value pairs
There is a hard and easy way to convert JSON to a class. While it is possible
to treat JSON as just a long string and try to parse out the data, it is much
easier to use a package that already knows how to do that. Flutter has a built-
in package for decoding JSON, but in this chapter, you will use the
freezed, json_serializable and json_annotation packages to
help make the process easier.
Flutter’s built-in dart:convert package contains methods like
json.decode() and json.encode(), which converts a JSON string
to a Map<String, dynamic> and back. While this is a step ahead of
manually parsing JSON, you still have to write extra code that takes that
map and puts the values into a new class.
The json_serializable package is useful because it can generate
model classes for you according to the annotations you provide via the
json_annotation package. freezed is even more powerful and
allows you to create classes that handle both JSON serialization and
deserialization and provides the following methods:
• copyWith: Allows you to create copies of a class by changing specific
fields.
• toString: Creates a method that returns a string with all data values.
• equals operator: Provides equality. This is needed for adding classes to
lists and maps.
• hashCode: Getter that provides a unique value for the class and its

--- Page 383 ---
values. Needed for equals to work.
• toJson: Returns a JSON Map<String, dynamic>.
• fromJson: Converts a JSON map to this class.
Since freezed uses the json_serializable package, we will talk
about freezed. Before looking at automated serialization, you must
understand how to serialize JSON manually.
So, how do you go about writing code to serialize JSON yourself? Typical
model classes have toJson() and fromJson() methods. The
toJson() method helps to convert objects into JSON strings, and the
fromJson() method helps to parse a JSON string into an object so you
can use it inside the program. In an earlier chapter, you wrote the Movie
class. The following is an example of what it would look like with the two
new methods:
class Movie {
  final int movieId;
  final String image;
  final String title;
  final String overview;
  final double popularity;
  final DateTime releaseDate;
  Movie({required this.movieId, required this.image, required this.title, 
required this.overview, required this.popularity, required this.releaseDate});
  factory Movie.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) {
    return Movie(
      movieId: json['movieId'],
      image: json['image'],
      title: json['title'],
      overview: json['overview'],
      popularity: json['popularity'],
      releaseDate: json['releaseDate'],
    );
  }
  Map<String, dynamic> toJson() {

--- Page 384 ---
    return <String, dynamic>{ 
      'movieId': movieId, 
      'image': image,
      'title': title,
      'overview': overview,
      'popularity': popularity,
      'releaseDate': releaseDate,
    };
  }
}
Notice that we have to write every single field to create a new movie and
convert it into a JSON map. This is a lot of work. With freezed, you will
add annotations to the class and write it in a certain way to have it generate a
lot of code for you.
1. Start by adding the needed libraries to the pubspec.yaml file. Under
the dependencies section, add the following:
  intl: ^0.18.1 
  json_annotation: ^4.8.1
  freezed_annotation: ^2.4.1
2. Under the dev_dependencies section, add:
  json_serializable: ^6.7.1
  freezed: ^2.4.7
The intl package is the Flutter internationalization package which has
some date formatting utilities that we will be using. Both annotation
packages have annotation classes that are needed for your models. The dev
dependencies are used when running the builder. Do a Pub get. Now that we
have these libraries, it is time to create the models for the movies. As you
saw earlier, the TMDB website lists movies in JSON format. It looks as
follows:
{
  "dates": {
    "maximum": "2024-08-14",
    "minimum": "2024-07-03"

--- Page 385 ---
  },
  "page": 1,
  "results": [
    {
      "adult": false,
      "backdrop_path": "/yDHYTfA3R0jFYba16jBB1ef8oIt.jpg",
      "genre_ids": [
        28,
        35,
        878
      ],
      "id": 533535,
      "original_language": "en",
      "original_title": "Deadpool & Wolverine",
      "overview": "A listless Wade Wilson toils away in civilian life with his 
days as the morally flexible mercenary, Deadpool, behind him. But when his 
homeworld faces an existential threat, Wade must reluctantly suit-up again 
with an even more reluctant Wolverine.",
      "popularity": 11132.622,
      "poster_path": "/8cdWjvZQUExUUTzyp4t6EDMubfO.jpg",
      "release_date": "2024-07-24",
      "title": "Deadpool & Wolverine",
      "video": false,
      "vote_average": 7.893,
      "vote_count": 1634
    },
  ],
  "total_pages": 167,
  "total_results": 3339
}
This just shows one entry, but the important parts are as follows:
• page: This shows which page is returned.

--- Page 386 ---
• results: This is the list of movies.
• In the brackets are all the details for the movie.
• total_pages: The total number of pages worth of movies the API could
return. Useful for downloading the next page.
• total_results: This gives the total number of movies available.
Data models
We will need to create a movie class that has this information in it. In the
data/models folder, create a new file named movie_results.dart.
1. Start by adding the imports and parts as follows:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
import 'package:intl/intl.dart';
part 'movie_results.freezed.dart';
part 'movie_results.g.dart';
This imports the freezed annotation and the international package. The
part files will be created for you when you run the builder. The freezed
file is for equality, and the g file is for JSON.
2. Next, add a helper function that helps override the serialization so that
we can use dates instead of strings:
// Parsing function to be used by @JsonKey
DateTime? _parseDate(String? dateString) {
  if (dateString == null || dateString.isEmpty) {
    return null;
  }
  return DateFormat('yyyy-MM-dd').parse(dateString);
}
This just uses the intl package’s DateFormat class to convert a
string into a DateTime class.
3. Now add the class. Note that we are not using every single field that the
data returns, just the most useful:
// 1
@freezed

--- Page 387 ---
// 2
class MovieResults with _$MovieResults {
// 3
  const factory MovieResults({
// 4
    @JsonKey(name: 'backdrop_path')
    String? backdropPath,
// 5
    required int id,
    @JsonKey(name: 'original_title')
    required String originalTitle,
    required String overview,
    @JsonKey(name: 'poster_path')
    String? posterPath,
    @JsonKey(name: 'media_type')
    String? mediaType,
    required bool adult,
    required String title,
    @JsonKey(name: 'original_language')
    required String originalLanguage,
    @JsonKey(name: 'genre_ids')
    required List<int> genreIds,
    required double popularity,
// 6
    @JsonKey(name: 'release_date', fromJson: _parseDate)
    DateTime? releaseDate,
    required bool video,
    @JsonKey(name: 'vote_average')
    required double voteAverage,
    @JsonKey(name: 'vote_count')
    required int voteCount,
// 7
  }) = _MovieResults;

--- Page 388 ---
// 8
  factory MovieResults.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) =>
      _$MovieResultsFromJson(json);
}
Here, we are creating a MovieResults class. The with
_$MovieResults is a mixin that will be generated by freezed. It
uses a factory method to create the MovieResults class. The
following is a description of the important elements:
1. Use the @freezed annotation to mark the class to be generated
with freezed.
2. Use the generated _$MovieResults mixin.
3. Use a factory to create the class.
4. The @JsonKey annotation allows you to use one name for the field
and another for the data it should be expecting. In Dart, you do not
use underscores for field names.
5. If a field is not nullable, it needs the required keyword.
6. Use the fromJson annotation to specify a function to convert the
field into a date.
7. The factory ends with an underscore class name. This is needed by
freezed.
8. Use a factory for the fromJson method. Freezed will create the
method.
4. In the terminal window, run the build runner command:
dart run build_runner build
You should now see the .freezed.dart and .g.dart files.
Remember when you saw the JSON output there were fields for
total_pages and total_results? We will need to write a class
that has these fields. It will also contain a list of the movies.
5. In the same folder, create a new file named
movie_response.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/movie_results.dart';

--- Page 389 ---
part 'movie_response.freezed.dart';
part 'movie_response.g.dart';
@freezed
class MovieResponse with _$MovieResponse {
  const factory MovieResponse({
    required int page,
    required List<MovieResults> results,
    @JsonKey(name: 'total_pages')
    required int totalPages,
    @JsonKey(name: 'total_results')
    required int totalResults
          }) = _MovieResponse;
  factory MovieResponse.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic>  json) => 
_$MovieResponseFromJson(json);
}
6. In the terminal window, run the build runner command:
dart run build_runner build
Looking at the Dart Analysis tab in Android Studio, you will see some
warnings on the JsonKey annotations. This warning does not understand
how the classes are built, and if you want to remove those warnings, you
can add the following to the analysis_options.yaml file
underneath the last analyzer item:
  errors:
    invalid_annotation_target: ignore
Now, it is time to start using these models.
Networking packages
Dart provides the http package. This provides basic functionality for
accessing the internet. While it is perfectly fine to use this package, there are
many others that provide functionality like logging, network timeouts, and
response and request modification. Many web services that provide data use
REST, a style for designing networked applications. It provides several
different interfaces, as follows:

--- Page 390 ---
• GET: for retrieving information.
• POST: For creating new data.
• PUT: For updating existing data.
• DELETE: For deleting data.
Data is usually in JSON format but can also be in other formats, like XML.
Since JSON is easy to use and is part of Dart and Flutter, we will use that
format.
Many other packages provide a bit more functionality than the http
package.
Dio package
An application programming interface (API) is a set of rules that define
how systems communicate. The TMDB website has APIs for talking to its
movie database. We will use the Dio package because it is easy to use to talk
to this database or set of APIs.
1. Start out by adding the Dio package to the pubspec.yaml:
  dio: ^5.4.3+1
Perform a Pub get.
2. Next, create a new folder in the lib folder named network. Inside this
folder, create a new file named movie_api_service.dart. Add
the following:
import 'package:dio/dio.dart';
// 1
const String movieAPIUrl = 'https://api.themoviedb.org/3/';
// 2
const trendingUrl = 'trending/movie/week';
const nowPlayingUrl = 'movie/now_playing';
const topRatedUrl = 'movie/top_rated';
const popularUrl = 'movie/popular';
const pageParameterName = 'page';
const movieIdParameterName = 'movie_id';
const apiKeyParameterName = 'api_key';

--- Page 391 ---
class MovieAPIService {
  late final Dio dio;
  final showDebugInfo = false;
}
This defines several URLs needed for movies and then defines the class and
a flag to show debug information. If you look at the Now Playing page on
the TMDB website, you will see the following:
Figure 11.11: TMDB Now Playing API
The https://api.themoviedb.org/3/ URL is called the base URL. All
other URLs are made from this URL plus a specific location, like
movie/now_playing. We will be concatenating these strings to
make the full URL. We have defined a late field for the Dio class
because we will initialize it later. The showDebugInfo is a flag for
printing all the network calls. This is useful as it prints all the network
calls to the console.
3. Add the following:
  MovieAPIService() {
    configureDio();
  }
  void configureDio() {
    final options = BaseOptions(
      baseUrl: movieAPIUrl,
      connectTimeout: const Duration(seconds: 5),
      receiveTimeout: const Duration(seconds: 3),
    );
    dio = Dio(options);
    // TODO Add interceptors
  }

--- Page 392 ---
This creates options for Dio with the base URL and some timeouts for
connecting and receiving data. We then create the Dio class with those
options.
4. For the TODO, add the following:
    dio.interceptors.add(
// 1
      InterceptorsWrapper(
// 2
        onRequest: (RequestOptions options, RequestInterceptorHandler 
handler) {
// 3
          final queryParameters = options.queryParameters;
          queryParameters[apiKeyParameterName] = apiKey;
          return handler.next(options);
        },
        onResponse: (Response response, ResponseInterceptorHandler 
handler) {
          // Do something with response data.
          // If you want to reject the request with a error message,
          // you can reject a `DioException` object using 
`handler.reject(dioError)`.
          return handler.next(response);
        },
// 4
        onError: (DioException error, ErrorInterceptorHandler handler) {
          // Do something with response error.
          // If you want to resolve the request with some custom data,
          // you can resolve a `Response` object using 
`handler.resolve(response)`.
          return handler.next(error);
        },
      ),
    );

--- Page 393 ---
// 5
    if (showDebugInfo) {
      dio.interceptors.add(LogInterceptor(
        responseBody: true,
        // Whether to log the response body (can be large)
        error: true,
        // Whether to log errors
        request: true,
        // Whether to log requests
        requestHeader: true,
        // Whether to log request headers
        responseHeader: true, // Whether to log response headers
      ));
    }
This adds an interceptor. This will intercept all API calls both before, after,
and when there is an error. You can handle errors in the onError callback
and add the API key to each query in the onRequest callback. If you look
at the onRequest call, you will see that we get the current query
parameters map and add the API key. The showDebugInfo flag adds a
logging interceptor to print out all API data. This helps when debugging
problems. However, you should always turn this off before shipping a
product. The major sections are as follows:
1. Use an InterceptorsWrapper helper class. (Makes it easier to
write)
2. The onRequest method catches requests before they are made and
can modify them.
3. Get the current query parameters and add the API key.
4. Handle errors. This is a good place to handle expired access tokens.
5. Add a LogInterceptor to print API call information.
API Security
You may have noticed that there is an error with the apiKey variable. We
have not defined it yet because we do not want to put this key in our app.

--- Page 394 ---
This would be a security problem if someone were to download your app
and look at the source code. To get around this problem, you can use a
library to store the information in a file that has not been checked into source
control. One of these libraries is the flutter_dotennv package. This
package will load the variable inside an invisible .env file in your root
directory.
1. Add the following to your pubspec.yaml:
  flutter_dotenv: ^5.1.0
2. Now, in the root folder of your project, create a new file named .env
(make sure you have a dot before the name; this makes it invisible on
the system). If you have your files in git, add the .env file to your
.gitignore file. You also need to add this to your list of assets so
that it is included in your app.
3. To do this, add the following as an assets section at the bottom of the
pubspec.yaml file:
  assets:
    - .env
Perform a Pub Get. Make sure that assets is indented properly
underneath uses-material-design.
4. In the .env file, add your key as follows:
TMDB_KEY=''
Add your key inside of the single quotes.
5. Next, in the movie_api_service.dart file, after the dio field
add the following:
  final String apiKey = dotenv.env['TMDB_KEY']!;
Add the import:
import ‘package:flutter_dotenv/flutter_dotenv.dart’;
This will allow us to have the key just on our development machine.
You could add it to a continuous integration (CI) machine as well, if
needed. Now, you need to initialize dotenv to load the .env file.
6. In main.dart, change the definition of the main function to:
Future<void> main() async {

--- Page 395 ---
Add the following before the runApp call:
  await dotenv.load(fileName: '.env');
Add the import for dotenv.
Trending movies
Now that we have the dio class configured, we need to write a method that
will get the list of trending movies.
1. In the movie_api_service.dart, at the end of the class, add the
following code:
  Future<Response> getTrending([int page = 1]) async {
    final response =
    await dio.get(trendingUrl, queryParameters: {pageParameterName: 
page});
    return response;
  }
This method takes an optional page number that defaults to one. It then
uses the trending URL (which is added to the base URL) and a page
query. Changing the page number will get the movie results for that
page.
Now that we have our movie API service, we need to add a provider so
that other classes can use it.
2. Open up providers.dart and add:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
MovieAPIService movieAPIService(MovieAPIServiceRef ref) => 
MovieAPIService();
3. Add the import for the MovieAPIService and then change the
construction of the view model:
  final model = MovieViewModel(movieAPIService: 
ref.read(movieAPIServiceProvider));
4. Open movie_viewmodel.dart and add the service at the
beginning of the class:
  final MovieAPIService movieAPIService;
5. Add the movie API import. Add a constructor:

--- Page 396 ---
  MovieViewModel({required this.movieAPIService});
6. In the terminal window, run the build runner command:
dart run build_runner build
Logging
Since we could get errors, it would be nice to have the ability to log error
messages. We will use the lumberdash library. Lumberdash and the color
packages provide very nice logging capabilities and will print in color.
1. Open pubspec.yaml and add:
  lumberdash: ^3.0.0
  colorize_lumberdash: ^3.0.0
2. Do a Pub get and then open main.dart. At the top of the main
function add:
  WidgetsFlutterBinding.ensureInitialized();
  putLumberdashToWork(withClients: [
    ColorizeLumberdash(),
  ]);
This will ensure that Flutter is initialized before configuring Lumber Dash.
ViewModel
We can now use this service in the movie view model.
1. Open movie_viewmodel.dart. In the setup method, remove the
loadMovies method. Go to getTrendingMovies.
2. Replace the method with the following:
// 1
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTrendingMovies(int page) async {
// 2
    final response = await movieAPIService.getTrending(page);
// 3
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
// 4
      var movieResponse = MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
      trendingMovies = movieResponse.results;

--- Page 397 ---
      return movieResponse;
    } else {
// 5
      logError(
          'Failed to load movies with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  } 
3. Then change the definition of trendingMovies to the following:
  List<MovieResults> trendingMovies = [];
Import the MovieResponse and MovieResults classes. Here, we
perform the following steps:
1. Return a MovieResponse.
2. Call the service to get the trending movies.
3. Check the status code. This service always returns 200 for success.
4. Parse the JSON into a MovieResponse class.
5. Otherwise, we have an error. Log the error.
Status codes are HTTP codes. Any codes in the 200-299 range are
considered successful. Codes in the range of 400-499 are client errors, and
500-599 are server errors.
Warning: this will cause a lot of errors in our code that we will have to work
through.
Fixing errors
1. Open home_screen.dart. You will need to change the definition of
movieFuture:
  Future<List<MovieResponse?>>? movieFuture;
2. Import MovieResponse. Inside of loadData, change the call to:
    movieFuture ??= Future.wait([
      movieViewModel.getTrendingMovies(1),
      // movieViewModel.getTopRated(1),

--- Page 398 ---
      // movieViewModel.getPopular(1),
      // movieViewModel.getNowPlaying(1)
    ]);
We will deal with the other calls later. Inside the buildScreen
method, comment out the HorizontalMovies for the last two
movie lists: popular and top-rated.
3. Inside of HorizontalMovies, change the definition of movies to:
  final List<MovieResults> movies;
4. Inside of MovieWidget change the fields and constructor to:
  final int movieId;
  final String movieUrl;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  final MovieType movieType;
  const MovieWidget(
      {required this.movieId,
      required this.movieUrl,
      required this.onMovieTap,
      required this.movieType,
      super.key});
5. Then change the hero tag to the following:
    uniqueHeroTag = widget.movieUrl + widget.movieType.name;
6. Then the imageUrl for CachedNetworkImage to:
              imageUrl: widget.movieUrl,
7. Change onMovieTap call to the following:
                        widget.onMovieTap(widget.movieId);
The movie URL is contained in the posterPath field of the
MovieResults class. However, this path is only a partial path. To
create the full path, we must create a method to build this path.
8. Open utils.dart and add the following code:
import 'package:intl/intl.dart';
enum ImageSize {
  small,

--- Page 399 ---
  large
}
String getImageUrl(ImageSize size, String? path) {
  if (path == null) {
    return '';
  }
  switch (size) {
    case ImageSize.small:
      return 'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w154/$path';
    case ImageSize.large:
      return 'http://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w780/$path';
  }
}
final yearFormat = DateFormat('yyyy');
String youtubeImageFromId(String videoId) {
  return 'https://img.youtube.com/vi/$videoId/hqdefault.jpg';
}
This will build a URL from a base URL, a small size of 154 or a large
size of 780, and a path. There is also a year formatter for the movie date
and a method for getting a YouTube URL.
9. Back in HorizontalMovies, add the following as the first line in
the itemBuilder section, replacing the current MovieWidget:
            final imageUrl = getImageUrl(ImageSize.small, 
movies[index].posterPath);
            return MovieWidget(
              movieId: movies[index].id,
              movieUrl: imageUrl,
              onMovieTap: onMovieTap,
              movieType: movieType,
            );
Do a full hot restart. You will see the trending list but not the Swiper
movies, as that uses the now playing list, which we commented out.
10. Open movie_api_service.dart and add the rest of the API

--- Page 400 ---
calls:
Future<Response> getNowPlaying([int page = 1]) async {
    final response = await dio
        .get(nowPlayingUrl, queryParameters: {pageParameterName: 
page});
    return response;
  }
  Future<Response> getTopRated([int page = 1]) async {
    final response =
        await dio.get(topRatedUrl, queryParameters: 
{pageParameterName: page});
    return response;
  }
  Future<Response> getPopular([int page = 1]) async {
    final response =
        await dio.get(popularUrl, queryParameters: {pageParameterName: 
page});
    return response;
  }
11. Back in MovieViewModel, change the other lists to
MovieResults:
  List<MovieResults> topRatedMovies = [];
  List<MovieResults> popularMovies = [];
  List<MovieResults> nowPlayingMovies = [];
12. Remove the allMovies variable and the loadMovies method.
Replace getPopular with:
  Future<MovieResponse?> getPopular(int page) async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getPopular(page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      var movieResponse = MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
      popularMovies = movieResponse.results;
      return movieResponse;
    } else {
      logError(

--- Page 401 ---
          'Failed to load movies with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
13. Replace getTopRated with the following:
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTopRated(int page) async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getTopRated(page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      var movieResponse = MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
      topRatedMovies = movieResponse.results;
      return movieResponse;
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load movies with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
14. Replace getNowPlaying with:
Future<MovieResponse?> getNowPlaying(int page) async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getNowPlaying(page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      var movieResponse = MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
      nowPlayingMovies = movieResponse.results;
      return movieResponse;
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load movies with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }

--- Page 402 ---
  }
15. Then, remove the findMovieById method.
There are a few more errors.
16. Open home_screen_image.dart. Underneath the
currentMovie, add the following:
         final imageUrl =
              getImageUrl(ImageSize.large, currentMovie.backdropPath);
17. Replace uniqueHeroTag with:
          String uniqueHeroTag = '${currentMovie.posterPath}swiper';
18. Replace onMovieTap with:
              onMovieTap(currentMovie.id);
19. Finally, replace currentMovie.image with:
                imageUrl: imageUrl,
20. In movie_detail.dart, comment out currentMovie for now.
21. In HomeScreen, uncomment the calls in loadData. All errors should
be gone, and you should be able to perform a hot restart. Do not click on
a movie, as that will crash until we get the details page fixed.
Movie details
To fix movie_details, we need the details for the movie that was
selected. To do that, we need a new API call to get the details.
1. At the top of movie_api_service.dart, add a new URL for the
details:
const movieUrl = 'movie';
2. After the getPopular method, add the following code:
  Future<Response> getMovieDetails(int movieId) async {
    return dio.get('$movieUrl/$movieId');
  }
This will get the details for a movie with the given ID. Now, we need to
create a model for the movie details.
3. Inside of the data/models directory, add genre.dart. Add the

--- Page 403 ---
following:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
part 'genre.freezed.dart';
part 'genre.g.dart';
@freezed
class Genre with _$Genre {
  const factory Genre({
    required int id,
    required String name,
  }) = _Genre;
  factory Genre.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$GenreFromJson(json);
}
@freezed
class Genres with _$Genres {
  const factory Genres({
    required List<Genre> genres,
  }) = _Genres;
  factory Genres.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$GenresFromJson(json);
}
This is just a model with an id and name. This will contain all the genres
that the movie has.
4. Next, create movie_details.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/genre.dart';
part 'movie_details.freezed.dart';
part 'movie_details.g.dart';
@freezed
class MovieDetails with _$MovieDetails {
  const factory MovieDetails({
    @JsonKey(name: 'adult')
    required bool adult,

--- Page 404 ---
    @JsonKey(name: 'backdrop_path')
    required String backdropPath,
    @JsonKey(name: 'budget')
    required int budget,
    @JsonKey(name: 'genres')
    required List<Genre> genres,
    @JsonKey(name: 'homepage')
    required String homepage,
    @JsonKey(name: 'id')
    required int id,
    @JsonKey(name: 'imdb_id')
    required String imdbId,
    @JsonKey(name: 'origin_country')
    required List<String> originCountry,
    @JsonKey(name: 'original_language')
    required String originalLanguage,
    @JsonKey(name: 'original_title')
    required String originalTitle,
    @JsonKey(name: 'overview')
    required String overview,
    @JsonKey(name: 'popularity')
    required double popularity,
    @JsonKey(name: 'poster_path')
    required String posterPath,
    @JsonKey(name: 'release_date')
    required DateTime releaseDate,
    @JsonKey(name: 'revenue')
    required int revenue,
    @JsonKey(name: 'runtime')
    required int runtime,
    @JsonKey(name: 'status')
    required String status,
    @JsonKey(name: 'tagline')

--- Page 405 ---
    required String tagline,
    @JsonKey(name: 'title')
    required String title,
    @JsonKey(name: 'video')
    required bool video,
    @JsonKey(name: 'vote_average')
    required double voteAverage,
    @JsonKey(name: 'vote_count')
    required int voteCount,
  }) = _MovieDetails;
  factory MovieDetails.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$MovieDetailsFromJson(json);
}
There is a lot here, but it contains all the necessary information.
5. In the terminal window, run the build runner command:
dart run build_runner build
6. Back in movie_viewmodel.dart, add the getMovieDetails
method at the bottom:
  Future<MovieDetails?> getMovieDetails(int movieId) async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getMovieDetails(movieId);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      try {
        return MovieDetails.fromJson(response.data);
      } catch (e) {
        logError('Failed to parse movie details with error $e');
        return null;
      }
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load movie details with error ${response.statusCode} 
and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }

--- Page 406 ---
  }
This will just call the API service to get the movie details. Now, the
MovieDetails class needs this information.
7. In this class, remove the following lines:
  List<GenreState> genreStates = [];
  late Movie currentMovie;
8. Along with the previous command, remove the buildGenreState
method and the call to it. In the buildScreen method, before the
SafeArea widget, add a FutureBuilder as follows:
    return FutureBuilder(
        future: loadData(),
        builder: (context, snapshot) {
          if (snapshot.connectionState != ConnectionState.done) {
            return const NotReady();
          }
          if (snapshot.hasError) {
            logMessage('Error: ${snapshot.error.toString()}');
            return Text(snapshot.error.toString());
          }
          final movieDetails = snapshot.data as MovieDetails?;
          if (movieDetails == null) {
            return const NotReady();
          }
You will need to fix the ending parentheses by adding the following at
the end of the method:
    },
    );
9. At the bottom, add the following code:
  Future loadData() async {
    return movieViewModel.getMovieDetails(widget.movieId);
  }
This will return a Future that will have the MovieDetails in the

--- Page 407 ---
snapshot.data. Instead of passing in parts to the other classes, we
will just pass in the details class.
10. Update the DetailImage parameter and constructor to:
  final MovieDetails details;
  const DetailImage({required this.details, super.key});
11. After the screenWidth variable, add the following:
    final imageUrl = getImageUrl(ImageSize.large, 
widget.details.backdropPath);
12. Then change widget.movieUrl to imageUrl, and the hard-
coded strings:
'Dune'
To:
widget.details.title,
'2024'
To:
yearFormat.format(widget.details.releaseDate)
13. Back in MovieDetail, change:
    DetailImage(movieUrl: currentMovie.image)
To:
    DetailImage(details: movieDetails)
14. Inside of GenreRow, change:
  final List<GenreState> genres;
To:
  final List<Genre> genres;
And genre.genre to genre.name.
15. After that, change the call in MovieDetails from:
       GenreRow(genres: genreStates),
To:
       GenreRow(genres: movieDetails.genres),
16. In MovieOverview, change:
  final String details;

--- Page 408 ---
To:
final MovieDetails details;
17. Also, change the following:
        details,
To:
        details.overview,
In MovieDetail update the call to MovieOverview to:
        MovieOverview(details:movieDetails),
Hot restart. If you click on a movie, you should now see actual data on the
movie. Your screen will look something as follows:

--- Page 409 ---
Figure 11.12: Movie Details
Trailers and cast
Notice that there is still the hard-coded Trailer and cast members. TMDB has
APIs for both movies and cast members.
1. Open up MovieAPIService and add the following video and credit
constants:
const videosParameter = 'videos';
const creditsParameter = 'credits';
2. Now add the method to get the list of videos for a movie:

--- Page 410 ---
  Future<Response> getMovieVideos(int movieId) async {
    return dio.get('$movieUrl/$movieId/$videosParameter');
  }
3. Add the method to get the list of credits for a movie:
  Future<Response> getMovieCredits(int movieId) async {
    return dio.get('$movieUrl/$movieId/$creditsParameter');
  }
Now that we have these calls, we need the models to put them in.
4. In the data/models directory, add movie_videos.dart. Add
the following code:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
part 'movie_videos.freezed.dart';
part 'movie_videos.g.dart';
@freezed
class MovieVideos with _$MovieVideos {
  const factory MovieVideos({
    @JsonKey(name: 'id')
    required int id,
    @JsonKey(name: 'results')
    required List<MovieVideo> results,
  }) = _MovieVideos;
  factory MovieVideos.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$MovieVideosFromJson(json);
}
@freezed
class MovieVideo with _$MovieVideo {
  const factory MovieVideo({
    @JsonKey(name: 'name')
    required String name,
    @JsonKey(name: 'key')
    required String key,
    @JsonKey(name: 'size')
    required int size,

--- Page 411 ---
    @JsonKey(name: 'official')
    required bool official,
    @JsonKey(name: 'published_at')
    required DateTime publishedAt,
    @JsonKey(name: 'id')
    required String id,
  }) = _MovieVideo;
  factory MovieVideo.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$MovieVideoFromJson(json);
}
5. Create the credits file: movie_credits.dart. The code is as
follows:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
part 'movie_credits.freezed.dart';
part 'movie_credits.g.dart';
@freezed
class MovieCredits with _$MovieCredits {
  const factory MovieCredits({
    @JsonKey(name: 'id')
    required int id,
    @JsonKey(name: 'cast')
    required List<MovieCast> cast,
    @JsonKey(name: 'crew')
    required List<MovieCast> crew,
  }) = _MovieCredits;
  factory MovieCredits.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$MovieCreditsFromJson(json);
}
@freezed
class MovieCast with _$MovieCast {
  const factory MovieCast({
    @JsonKey(name: 'adult')
    required bool adult,

--- Page 412 ---
    @JsonKey(name: 'gender')
    required int gender,
    @JsonKey(name: 'id')
    required int id,
    @JsonKey(name: 'name')
    required String name,
    @JsonKey(name: 'original_name')
    required String originalName,
    @JsonKey(name: 'popularity')
    required double popularity,
    @JsonKey(name: 'profile_path')
    required String? profilePath,
    @JsonKey(name: 'cast_id')
    int? castId,
    @JsonKey(name: 'character')
    String? character,
    @JsonKey(name: 'credit_id')
    required String creditId,
    @JsonKey(name: 'order')
    int? order,
    @JsonKey(name: 'job')
    String? job,
  }) = _MovieCast;
  factory MovieCast.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$MovieCastFromJson(json);
}
6. In the terminal window, run the build runner command:
dart run build_runner build
7. Add the following two methods to MovieViewModel:
Future<MovieVideos?> getMovieVideos(int movieId) async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getMovieVideos(movieId);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      try {

--- Page 413 ---
        return MovieVideos.fromJson(response.data);
      } catch (e) {
        logError('Failed to parse movie videos with error $e');
        return null;
      }
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load movie videos with error ${response.statusCode} 
and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
  Future<MovieCredits?> getMovieCredits(int movieId) async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getMovieCredits(movieId);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      try {
        return MovieCredits.fromJson(response.data);
      } catch (e) {
        logError('Failed to parse movie credits with error $e');
        return null;
      }
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load movie credits with error ${response.statusCode} 
and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
8. Now, in MovieDetail, add the following underneath
movieViewModel:
  MovieCredits? credits;
  MovieVideos? movieVideos;
9. Change the Trailer call to:

--- Page 414 ---
         movieVideos: movieVideos?.results,
10. Then, change the hard-code video to:
VideoPageRoute(movieVideo: video));
11. Inside of Trailer, change:
  final List<String>? movieVideos;
To:
  final List<MovieVideo>? movieVideos;
Change:
        imageUrl: movieVideo,
To:
        imageUrl: youtubeImageFromId(movieVideo.key),
12. Also, change 'Dune' to:
movieVideo.name
13. In utils.dart, change OnMovieVideoTap to:
typedef OnMovieVideoTap = void Function(MovieVideo video);
You will then need to change the video items.
14. In VideoPage, change the String to:
  final MovieVideo movieVideo;
15. In initState, change the youtubeUrlFromId call to:
youtubeUrlFromId(widget.movieVideo.key),
16. Back in MovieDetail, add the following after the Trailer call:
Padding(
         padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16, bottom: 16, top: 16),
   child: Text('Cast', style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.headlineLarge),),
This will add a title of Cast below the trailer and before the cast.
17. Next, change the HorizontalCast call to:
HorizontalCast(castList: credits?.cast ?? []),
(Make sure to remove the const).
18. Add the following calls to the beginning of the loadData method:
    credits = await movieViewModel.getMovieCredits(widget.movieId);

--- Page 415 ---
    movieVideos = await 
movieViewModel.getMovieVideos(widget.movieId);
Now, we have some errors in these widgets. We will need to change
their parameters.
19. Next, open HorizontalCast and change castList to:
final List<MovieCast> castList;
20. Change the CastImage call to:
return CastImage(imageUrl: getImageUrl(ImageSize.small, 
castList[index].profilePath), name: castList[index].name);
21. In the terminal window, run the build runner command:
dart run build_runner build
(Note: You may have to add imports to the app_routes.dart file)
Perform a hot reload, and you should see real trailers for the movie and the
cast members, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 416 ---
Figure 11.13: Movie Details with Cast
Home screen image
Now that we have movie details on the detail screen, we need those details
on the main home screen. Open home_screen_image.dart. Replace:
            child: Hero(
              tag: uniqueHeroTag,
              child: CachedNetworkImage(
                imageUrl: imageUrl,
                alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                height: 374,

--- Page 417 ---
                width: screenWidth,
              ),
            ),
With the following:
           child: Padding(
              padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
              child: Stack(children: [
                Align(
                  alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                  child: Hero(
                    tag: uniqueHeroTag,
                    child: CachedNetworkImage(
                      imageUrl: imageUrl,
                      alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                      fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                      height: 374,
                      width: screenWidth,
                    ),
                  ),
                ),
                Align(
                  alignment: Alignment.bottomLeft,
                  child: Padding(
                    padding: const EdgeInsets.only(left: 16.0),
                    child: Column(
                      mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                      mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
                      crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                      children: [
                        Text(
                          movieViewModel.nowPlayingMovies[index].title,
                          style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.headlineLarge,
                        ),
                        addVerticalSpace(4),

--- Page 418 ---
                        currentMovie.releaseDate != null
                            ? Text(
                                yearFormat.format(currentMovie.releaseDate!),
                                style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium,
                              )
                            : Container(),
                        addVerticalSpace(4),
                        Padding(
                          padding:
                              const EdgeInsets.only(bottom: 8.0, right: 8.0),
                          child: AutoSizeText(
                            movieViewModel.nowPlayingMovies[index].overview,
                            style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium,
                            maxLines: 3,
                            overflow: TextOverflow.ellipsis,
                          ),
                        ),
                      ],
                    ),
                  ),
                )
              ]),
            ),
This will add the movie name, release year, and details to the main image, as
shown in the following figure:

--- Page 419 ---
Figure 11.14: Movie text
Final APIs
There are a few more APIs that we will use in later chapters. We will add
them but not use them until later. The first one retrieves a list of genres.
1. In movie_api_service.dart, add the following constants:
const genreUrl = ‘genre/movie/list’;
const searchMovieUrl = 'search/movie';
const discoverMovieUrl = 'discover/movie';
const configurationUrl = 'configuration';

--- Page 420 ---
const queryParameterName = 'query';
const genreParameterName = 'with_genres';
2. Add the following code to the end of the class:
  Future<Response> getGenres() async {
    final response = await dio.get(genreUrl);
    return response;
  }
  Future<Response> searchMovies(String query, [int page = 1]) async {
    return dio
        .get(searchMovieUrl, queryParameters: {queryParameterName: 
query});
  }
  Future<Response> searchMoviesByGenre(String genre, [int page = 1]) 
async {
    return dio.get(discoverMovieUrl,
        queryParameters: {genreParameterName: genre, 
pageParameterName: page});
  }
  Future<Response> getMovieConfiguration() async {
    return dio.get(configurationUrl);
  }
After the getGenres method, there is searchMovies to search by
a query string, searchMoviesByGenre to search by genre, and
finally, getMovieConfiguration, which will be used to get
configuration information in a later chapter.
3. Now, update MovieViewModel. Replace:
  late List<String> movieGenres;
With:
List<Genre>? movieGenres;
4. Replace setupGenres with:
  Future setupGenres() async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getGenres();
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {

--- Page 421 ---
      movieGenres = Genres.fromJson(response.data).genres;
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load genres with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');
    }
  }
This will get all of the current genres that the service supports.
5. At the end of the class add:
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMoviesByGenre(String genres, int 
page) async {
    final response = await 
movieAPIService.searchMoviesByGenre(genres, page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      var movieResponse = MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
      return movieResponse;
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load movies with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMovies(String searchText, int page) 
async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.searchMovies(searchText, 
page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      var movieResponse = MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
      return movieResponse;
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load movies with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');

--- Page 422 ---
      return null;
    }
  }
These two methods just implement the APIs for searching for movies.
Genres
Now that MovieViewModel loads genres instead of strings, you need to
change some of the genre screens.
1. Open genre_screen.dart. Add a ! character after the
movieGenres in the buildGenreState method:
    for (final genre in movieViewModel.movieGenres!) {
2. Open GenreState and change the string to a Genre:
  final Genre genre;
3. In GenreSection, change the GridView to:
             child: GridView.builder(
                shrinkWrap: true,
                padding: const EdgeInsets.all(0.0),
                itemCount: genreChips.length,
                gridDelegate: const 
SliverGridDelegateWithFixedCrossAxisCount(
                    crossAxisCount: 3,
                    crossAxisSpacing: 0,
                    childAspectRatio: 2.2,
                    mainAxisSpacing: 0),
4. Then, in getGenreChips, change the following:
      final genreState = widget.genreStates[index];
To:
      final genre = widget.genreStates[index].genre;
And:
       label: AutoSizeText(genreState.genre.name,
To:
       label: Text(genre.name,

--- Page 423 ---
And:
                  genre: genreState.genre,
To:
                 genre: genre,
Hot restart and test the Genre screen. As you can see, adding network calls
required many changes. Ideally, you would write your networking code early
on in your app work so you can design around the models instead of using
strings, as we needed to do.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about APIs and networking packages. You also
saw how to sign up for a service that provides an API and how to implement
those APIs in code.
In the next chapter, you will learn about local storage and databases. These
will allow you to store user information locally so that a network connection
is not always needed and to save application settings.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 424 ---
CHAPTER 12
Local Storage and Databases
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about storing information on the device. You
will learn about storing data from simple key/value pairs to full databases
and tables. This will allow you to save user information as well as cache data
that does not need to be downloaded each time the app starts up.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• SharedPreferences
• Saving genres
• Databases
• Movie configuration
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have a solid understanding of
SharedPreferences and how to create local databases. You will learn how to
create tables and database classes to interact with local files. You will save a
user's genre selections to SharedPreferences and favorites to a local
database. You will also download movie configuration and genre

--- Page 425 ---
information and store them in the local database, caching that information
for future sessions.
SharedPreferences
So far, you have learned how to build UIs that display information but have
not saved any information on the local device. When a user restarts your
app, it will start the same way each time. If you wanted to have settings or
preferences that a user could set, it would not do any good if it only lasted
the lifetime of the current session. In this chapter, you will learn how to save
those settings and movie information so that if there is no internet
connection, those settings will still be available. There are many types of
information you could save. You could save the current screen the user is on
or their sorting preferences. In this chapter, you will save the user's favorites
locally. Since these favorites cannot be stored on The Movie Database
(TMDB) site, saving them locally is a good option. Of course, if the user
uninstalls your app, they will lose any settings saved locally. For more
permanent storage, you would need a server that would allow you to save
that information. In Chapter 15, Firebase, you will learn about Firebase and
how you can save that information in the cloud. There are several ways to
save data locally. This is usually done using the local storage that phones
provide. You could save the information in a file you create but that is pretty
low-level and there are better ways to do it. Both iOS and Android have a
way to save preferences as well as a built-in SQLite database that can be
used to save data. We will cover both preferences and different ways to use
databases.
There are many types of persistence, but one of the most basic is the notion
of preferences, where you can save small amounts of data. This is called
SharedPreferences on Android. If you are familiar with iOS, that class is
called UserDefaults. These classes allow you to save very simple
key/value pairs to the device. It is not meant to store large amounts of data; it
is meant to store settings. This can be the current user’s access token, name,
settings values, or anything that can be stored as an int, String, double, or
Boolean. We will be using the shared_preferences plugin. This
plugin supports all platforms.

--- Page 426 ---
Next, we will create a Prefs class that will handle all interactions with the
shared_preferences plugin:
1. Open up pubspec.yaml and add:
shared_preferences: ^2.2.3
2. Click on Pub get.
3. Next, create prefs.dart in the utils directory. Add the following:
import 'package:shared_preferences/shared_preferences.dart';
class Prefs {
  final SharedPreferences preferences;
  Prefs(this.preferences);
   
  // Add String methods
}
This is the Prefs class that takes an instance of the
SharedPreferences class.
4. Next, create two methods for storing and getting strings:
void setString(String key, String value) {
    preferences.setString(key, value);
  }
  String? getString(String key) {
    return preferences.getString(key);
  }
Notice that the set method takes a key and a string value. The getter
just needs the key. If it does not exist, a null value is returned.
5. Add the remaining methods:
  void setInt(String key, int value) {
    preferences.setInt(key, value);
  }

--- Page 427 ---
  int? getInt(String key) {
    return preferences.getInt(key);
  }
  void setBool(String key, bool value) {
    preferences.setBool(key, value);
  }
  bool? getBool(String key) {
    return preferences.getBool(key);
  }
  void setDouble(String key, double value) {
    preferences.setDouble(key, value);
  }
  double? getDouble(String key) {
    return preferences.getDouble(key);
  }
This just creates getters and settings for int, Booleans, and Doubles.
6. Open the providers.dart file in the lib directory. Add the
following:
import 'package:movies/utils/prefs.dart';
import 'package:shared_preferences/shared_preferences.dart';
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true) 
Future<SharedPreferences> sharedPrefs(SharedPrefsRef ref) =>
    SharedPreferences.getInstance();
(Make sure the imports are before the part statement). The first import is
for the prefs file you just created. The last import is for the
SharedPreferences plugin. The @Riverpod annotation tells the
Riverpod generator to create a single FutureProvider for the
SharedProvider plugin.
Since you created a nice class to make this package easier to use, you
will use the Prefs class instead. This also makes testing easier. Add
the following:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)

--- Page 428 ---
Future<Prefs> prefs(PrefsRef ref) async {
  final sharedPrefs = await ref.read(sharedPrefsProvider.future);
  return Prefs(sharedPrefs);
}
This will create a provider for the Prefs class.
7. Open up the Terminal tab at the bottom left of Android Studio, as
shown in the following figure:
Figure 12.1: Generating files
8. Then type dart run build_runner build. This will run
build_runner and will update the providers.g.dart file. You
can have the build_runner running continuously by using the
watch command instead of the build. Opening
providers.g.dart file, you will see something as follows:

--- Page 429 ---
Figure 12.2: Generated file
This class has been created for you, so do not attempt to change it yourself.
It will be overwritten the next time you run the builder. You do not need to
worry about what is created. The most important variable is the

--- Page 430 ---
sharedPrefsProvider variable. You can use this variable throughout
your code to get an instance of the SharedPreference instance.
Saving genres
A good way to use preferences is to save the selected genres. Since this is
only needed on a per-phone basis, it is perfect for saving the user time. For
example, if the user likes horror/romance films, pre-selecting those genres
would save them time. The first thing we want to do is put the
GenreState class into its file and add the freeze annotation.
Create the GenreState class:
1. Open up genre_section.dart and remove the GenreState
class.
2. In the data/models folder, create a new file named
genre_state.dart.
3. Add the following:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/genre.dart';
part 'genre_state.freezed.dart';
part 'genre_state.g.dart';
@freezed
class GenreState with _$GenreState {
  const factory GenreState({
    required Genre genre,
    required bool isSelected,
  }) = _GenreState;
  factory GenreState.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$GenreStateFromJson(json);
}
4. In the terminal, type:
dart run build_runner build.
5. Open genre_section.dart and add the GenreState import.
6. Open genre_screen.dart and add the GenreState import.

--- Page 431 ---
7. Above the GenreScreen class, add the following constant before the
class that will be used to save genres:
const String genreStringKey = 'GenreKey';
While we are in the genre class, we will be adding the ability to search
for movies.
8. Remove the currentMovieList variable.
9. Add the following variables:
  String currentSearchString = '';
  List<MovieResults> currentMovieList = [];
  final moviesNotifier = ValueNotifier<List<MovieResults>>([]);
  MovieResponse? currentMovieResponse;
  Sorting selectedSort = Sorting.aToz;
The currentSearchString holds the string the user is searching
for. As we no longer use the Movie class, the current movie list holds a
list of MovieResults. The currentMovieResponse is the
current list of movies based on the search a user made. Sorting starts
with an A-Z sort, but the user can change that.
10. Inside the buildGenreState method, add the following call at the
end of the method:
    getSelectedGenres();
11. At the end of the class, add the import for the collection package:
void getSelectedGenres() async {
// 1
    final prefs = await ref.read(prefsProvider.future);
// 2
    final genreNameList = prefs.getString(genreStringKey)?.split(',');
    if (genreNameList?.isNotEmpty == true) {
// 3
      for (final genreName in genreNameList!) {
// 4
        var genreState = genreStates

--- Page 432 ---
            .firstWhereOrNull((genre) => genre.genre.name == 
genreName);
        if (genreState != null) {
// 5
          final index = genreStates.indexOf(genreState);
          genreState = genreState.copyWith(isSelected: true);
          genreStates[index] = genreState;
        }
      }
    }
  }
You will need to add the collection import for the
firstWhereOrNull call. This method will get the genre settings
from the preferences package. Note that the genres are stored as a single
string, separated by commas. Here is a breakdown:
a. Get an instance of the Prefs class.
b. Get the genre string and split it into an array of genre names.
c. Go through each genre.
d. Find the genre state with that name.
e. Get the index and then make a copy with the selected value set.
This gets the genres, but how do you save them?
12. Before this method, add the following save method:
  void saveSelectedGenres() async {
    final prefs = await ref.read(prefsProvider.future);
    final genreNameList = genreStates.map((state) => 
state.genre.name).toList();
    prefs.setString(genreStringKey, genreNameList.join(','));
  }
This will get the Prefs class and save the genres as a comma separated
string.
13. Update the GenreSearchRow call:

--- Page 433 ---
                         GenreSearchRow((searchString) {
                            currentSearchString = searchString;
                            currentMovieResponse = null;
                            FocusScope.of(context).unfocus();
                            expandedNotifier.value = false;
                            search();
                          }),
This will take the searchString returned by the search row, close
the keyboard (unfocus call), close the genre section, and start a
search.
14. Since the search method does not exist yet, add the search
method:
  Future<List<MovieResults>?> search() async {
// 1
    if (currentSearchString.isEmpty && genreStates.isEmpty) {
      moviesNotifier.value = <MovieResults>[];
      return <MovieResults>[];
    }
// 2
    // 1st, search by title
    // Search through the list for the search string
    final pageNumber = (currentMovieResponse?.page == null)
        ? 1
        : (currentMovieResponse!.page + 1);
// 3
    if (currentSearchString.isNotEmpty) {
      currentMovieResponse =
          await movieViewModel.searchMovies(currentSearchString, 
pageNumber);
      currentMovieList = currentMovieResponse!.results;
    }

--- Page 434 ---
// 4
    // 2nd Search by genre if there is no search string
    if (currentSearchString.isEmpty && genreStates.isNotEmpty) {
      final buffer = getGenreString();
      currentMovieResponse = await 
movieViewModel.searchMoviesByGenre(
          buffer.toString(), pageNumber);
      currentMovieList = currentMovieResponse!.results;
      // 3rd Search through the movies to see if they match our genres
// 5
    } else if (genreStates.isNotEmpty && currentMovieList.isNotEmpty) 
{
      currentMovieList = currentMovieList.where((movie) {
        for (final selectedGenre in genreStates) {
          if (movie.genreIds.contains(selectedGenre.genre.id)) {
            return true;
          }
        }
        return false;
      }).toList();
    }
// 6
    sortMovies();
    return currentMovieList;
  }
The search method does several things. Here is a breakdown:
a. Check to see if the search string and genre states are empty.
b. Update the page number (There could be multiple pages of results).
c. Perform the search using the search string.
d. If the search string is empty and we have genres, do a search by
genre.
e. If we have genres, go through the results and find movies that have
those genres.

--- Page 435 ---
f. Sort the movies.
Now add the getGenreString and sortMovies methods.
15. Add the getGenreString method:
  StringBuffer getGenreString() {
    final buffer = StringBuffer();
    genreStates.map((e) {
      if (e.isSelected) {
        if (buffer.isNotEmpty) {
          buffer.write('|');
        }
        buffer.write(e.genre.id);
      }
    }).toList();
    return buffer;
  }
This method builds a StringBuffer that is a | delimited string. This
is required by the movies API.
16. Add the sortMovies method:
  void sortMovies() {
    if (currentMovieList.isEmpty) {
      return;
    }
    currentMovieList = currentMovieList.sorted((a, b) {
      switch (selectedSort) {
        case Sorting.aToz:
          return a.originalTitle.compareTo(b.originalTitle);

--- Page 436 ---
        case Sorting.zToa:
          return b.originalTitle.compareTo(a.originalTitle);
        case Sorting.rating:
          return b.popularity.compareTo(a.popularity);
        case Sorting.year:
          if (a.releaseDate != null && b.releaseDate != null) {
            return a.releaseDate!.compareTo(b.releaseDate!);
          }
      }
      return 0;
    });
    moviesNotifier.value = currentMovieList;
  }
This just returns a sorted list of movies. We now need a way to save the
selected genres.
17. Find onGenreSelected and replace with:
                            onGenresSelected: (genres) {
                              genreStates = genres;
                              saveSelectedGenres();
                              currentMovieResponse = null;
                            });
This will set the save the selected genres. Next, we need to save the
selected sort value.
18. Find SortPicker and change the call to:
                    SortPicker(
                        useSliver: true,
                        onSortSelected: (sorting) {

--- Page 437 ---
                          selectedSort = sorting;
                          sortMovies();
                        }),
This will re-sort the current movie list.
19. Change the call to VerticalMovieList with:
                    ValueListenableBuilder<List<MovieResults>>(
                      valueListenable: moviesNotifier,
                      builder: (BuildContext context, List<MovieResults> value,
                          Widget? child) {
                        return VerticalMovieList(
                          movies: value,
                          movieViewModel: movieViewModel,
                          onMovieTap: (movieId) {
                            context.router
                                .push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: movieId));
                          },
                        );
                      },
                  ),
This wraps the movie list with a ValueListenableBuilder. This
will help performance by only updating this section if the list of movies
changes. Notice that VerticalMovieList does not like those
changes.
20. Open vert_movie_list.dart and remove the onMovieTap
typedef as it already exists in utils. Import the utils.dart file.
21. Change the fields and constructor to the following:
  final List<MovieResults> movies;

--- Page 438 ---
  final MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  final OnMovieTap onMovieTap;
  const VerticalMovieList(
      {super.key,
      required this.movies,
      required this.movieViewModel,
      required this.onMovieTap,
      });
Add any imports.
22. Change the call to MovieRow to:
          return MovieRow(
            movie: movies[index],
            movieViewModel: movieViewModel,
            onMovieTap: (movie) {
              onMovieTap(movie.id);
            },
          );
This passes the view model to MovieRow.
23. Open movie_row.dart. Change the fields and constructor to:
  final MovieResults movie;
  final MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  final OnMovieResultsTap onMovieTap;
  const MovieRow({
    required this.movie,
    required this.movieViewModel,
    required this.onMovieTap,

--- Page 439 ---
    super.key,
  });
Add any imports. Notice that we changed onMovieTap to
onMovieResultsTap. That definition does not exist. We want to
pass the MovieResults to the caller.
24. Open utils.dart and add:
typedef OnMovieResultsTap = void Function(MovieResults movie);
const Widget emptyWidget = SizedBox.shrink();
25. Back in MovieRow, change the first two lines in the build method
with:
    final imageUrl = getImageUrl(ImageSize.small, movie.posterPath);
    final uniqueHeroTag = '${imageUrl}MovieRow';
    if (imageUrl.isNotEmpty) {
26. Change onMovieTap(movie.movieId) to:
          onMovieTap(movie);
27. Change the imageUrl parameter in CachedNetworkImage call
to:
                      imageUrl: imageUrl,
Next, you need to put in real movie information in instead of just using
the text title and 1979 for the title and year.
28. Replace the Column with:
              Expanded(
                child: LayoutBuilder(
                  builder: (BuildContext context, 
BoxConstraints constraints) {
                    return Column(
                      mainAxisSize: 
MainAxisSize.min,

--- Page 440 ---
                      mainAxisAlignment: 
MainAxisAlignment.end,
                      crossAxisAlignment: 
CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                      children: [
                        const Spacer(),
                        SizedBox(
                          width: 
constraints.maxWidth,
                          child: AutoSizeText(
                            movie.title,
                            maxLines: 3,
                            minFontSize: 10,
                            style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.labelLarge,
                            overflow: 
TextOverflow.ellipsis,
                          ),
                        ),
                        addVerticalSpace(4),
                        movie.releaseDate != null
                            ? Text(
                                
yearFormat.format(movie.releaseDate!),
                                style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium,
                              )
                            : Container(),

--- Page 441 ---
                        addVerticalSpace(4),
                      ],
                    );
                  },
                ),
              ),
This wraps the column with Expanded and LayoutBuilder widgets.
The Expanded widget makes the column as big as possible, and the
LayoutBuilder gives us some sizes to work with. Specifically, we need
the column's width. The SizedBox uses the constraints.maxWidth
value from the LayoutBuilder.
Perform a hot reload. Press the Genre tab, type in a search query, select any
genres, and press the search icon. You should see something like the
following figure:

--- Page 442 ---
Figure 12.3: Genre search
Databases
There are times when an internet connection is not available or when you
want to store information locally. That is where on-device databases come
in. By storing information locally, you can display information to the user
without a connection or save information to be uploaded to the internet later
when the connection is restored. Luckily, Flutter has many database options

--- Page 443 ---
for you. We will cover some of the most popular databases and then we will
use the drift database as the database for the movies app.
SQLite
Both Android and iOS come with the built-in SQLite database. This is a self-
contained, serverless SQL database engine. It is file based, very small, and
efficient. It does not require any configuration and uses SQL. If you are
familiar with SQL, you will understand how to use SQLite. However,
because it is based on SQL, it can be hard for users who do not know that
language. It is important to understand the basics of SQL. SQL stores data in
tables that are made up of columns and rows. Each column is a specific data
type, and each row is a record in that table. SQL comprises queries (getting
information) and commands for adding, deleting, and updating data. For
queries, you should use the SELECT command. This would look as follows:
SELECT name, address FROM Customers;
This command selects the name and address columns from the
Customers table.
To add data, you would use the INSERT command as follows:
INSERT INTO Customers (NAME, ADDRESS) VALUES(value1, 
value2);
This makes a new row and inserts value1 into the name column and value2
into the address column.
To delete a row, use the DELETE command as follows:
DELETE FROM Customers WHERE id = 1;
This command searches for the row with an id of 1 and deletes that row.
To update a row, use the UPDATE command as follows:
UPDATE Customers SET phone='555-12345' WHERE id=1;
This will change the row's phone column to this value for the row with an
id of 1.
If you want to use SQLite by itself, you can use the sqlite3 package. You can
find this package at: https://pub.dev/packages/sqlite3.

--- Page 444 ---
Floor
Floor is a reactive SQLite abstraction that is inspired by the Android Room
persistence library. This package requires a knowledge of SQL as you use
query statements in the code which is mapped to classes. If you come from
the Android world and like the Room database, you will be familiar with the
setup of this library. This package requires the creation of entities, which are
classes for storing information in tables. You then create a data access
object (DAO) class for queries, insertions, updates, and deletions. Finally,
you need to create a database class that extends the FloorDatabase. This
class will hold all of the DAO classes. Here is an example of a Person
entity:
import 'package:floor/floor.dart';
@entity
class Person {
  @primaryKey
  final int id;
  final String name;
  Person(this.id, this.name);
}
This uses the @entity annotation to mark this class as an entity. Because
the plugin uses annotations, you must use the floor generator to create
classes based on this annotation. To create a DAO, you would use something
as follows:
import 'package:floor/floor.dart';
@dao
abstract class PersonDao {
  @Query('SELECT * FROM Person')
  Future<List<Person>> findAllPeople();
  @Query('SELECT name FROM Person')
  Stream<List<String>> findAllPeopleName();
  @Query('SELECT * FROM Person WHERE id = :id')
  Stream<Person?> findPersonById(int id);
  @insert
  Future<void> insertPerson(Person person);

--- Page 445 ---
}
To create the database, you would create a class as follows:
import 'dart:async';
import 'package:floor/floor.dart';
import 'package:sqflite/sqflite.dart' as sqflite;
import 'dao/person_dao.dart';
import 'entity/person.dart';
part 'app_database.g.dart'; // the generated code will be there
@Database(version: 1, entities: [Person])
abstract class AppDatabase extends FloorDatabase {
  PersonDao get personDao;
}
To use the generated classes, you would write code as follows:
final database = await 
$FloorAppDatabase.databaseBuilder('app_database.db').build();
final personDao = database.personDao;
final person = Person(1, ‘Frank’);
await personDao.insertPerson(person);
final result = await personDao.findPersonById(1);
Hive
Hive is a lightweight and fast key/value database written in Dart. You can
also store annotated classes. Here is an example of a simple box:
var box = Hive.box('myBox');
box.put('name', 'David');
var name = box.get('name');
You can also create BoxCollections. This is just a collection of multiple
boxes. Here is an example:
final collection = await BoxCollection.open(
    'MyFirstFluffyBox', // Name of your database

--- Page 446 ---
    {'cats', 'dogs'}, // Names of your boxes
    path: './', // Path where to store your boxes 
(Only used in Flutter / Dart IO)
    key: HiveCipher(), // Key to encrypt your boxes 
(Only used in Flutter / Dart IO)
  );
  // Open your boxes. Optional: Give it a type.
  final catsBox = collection.openBox<Map>('cats');
  // Put something in
  await catsBox.put('fluffy', {'name': 'Fluffy', 
'age': 4});
  await catsBox.put('loki', {'name': 'Loki', 'age': 
2});
  // Get values of type (immutable) Map?
  final loki = await catsBox.get('loki');
To store a class you would write a class as follows:
@HiveType(typeId: 0)
class Person extends HiveObject {
  @HiveField(0)
  String name;
  @HiveField(1)
  int age;
}
You would use this class as follows:
var box = await Hive.openBox('myBox');
var person = Person()
  ..name = 'Dave'

--- Page 447 ---
  ..age = 22;
box.add(person);
print(box.getAt(0)); // Dave - 22
person.age = 30;
person.save();
You can find Hive at https://pub.dev/packages/hive.
Isar
If you are interested in a NoSQL database, then Isar is one of the best. It is
very fast and works on most platforms. The author originally used it for the
movies project and ran into trouble with the web. That part is still in
development, so we chose drift. Isar uses annotations and a generator as
well. Isar uses the @collection annotation for classes. One of the nice
features of this database is that you can have references for other collections.
Here is an example of an email and recipient class:
part 'email.g.dart';
@collection
class Email {
  Id id = Isar.autoIncrement; // you can also use id = null to auto increment
  @Index(type: IndexType.value)
  String? title;
  List<Recipient>? recipients;
  @enumerated
  Status status = Status.pending;
}
@embedded
class Recipient {
  String? name;
  String? address;
}
enum Status {
  draft,
  pending,

--- Page 448 ---
  sent,
}
As you can see, it has IDs, indexes, embedded classes, and the ability to
handle enumerations. To use the database, you will have to use the
path_provider package and open the database as follows:
final dir = await getApplicationDocumentsDirectory();
final isar = await Isar.open(
  [EmailSchema],
  directory: dir.path,
);
You can then query emails:
final emails = await isar.emails.filter()
  .titleContains('awesome', caseSensitive: false)
  .sortByStatusDesc()
  .limit(10)
  .findAll();
In addition to queries, you can also insert and delete:
final newEmail = Email()..title = 'Amazing new database';
await isar.writeTxn(() {
  await isar.emails.put(newEmail); // insert & update
});
final existingEmail = await isar.emails.get(newEmail.id!); // get
await isar.writeTxn(() {
  await isar.emails.delete(existingEmail.id!); // delete
});
One of the features the author likes about this database is its powerful query
language. The following are a few examples:

--- Page 449 ---
final importantEmails = isar.emails
  .where()
  .titleStartsWith('Important') // use index
  .limit(10)
  .findAll()
final specificEmails = isar.emails
  .filter()
  .recipient((q) => q.nameEqualTo('David')) // query embedded objects
  .or()
  .titleMatches('*university*', caseSensitive: false) // title containing 
'university' (case insensitive)
  .findAll()
You can find Isar at https://pub.dev/packages/isar. As mentioned earlier,
Isar would be a great database if you do not need it for the web.
Drift
Drift is described as a reactive persistence library built on top of SQLite.
You can find documentation for drift at https://pub.dev/packages/drift and
https://drift.simonbinder.eu/. Drift is similar to other packages in that you
need to create Table classes and annotate a Database class. It has a
builder for these generated files. Drift's tables are a bit different. All table
classes must extend the Table class, and you define fields with the get
keyword. The following is an example table:
class TodoItems extends Table {
  IntColumn get id => integer().autoIncrement()();
  TextColumn get title => text().withLength(min: 6, max: 32)();
  TextColumn get content => text().named('body')();
  IntColumn get category =>
      integer().nullable().references(TodoCategory, #id)();

--- Page 450 ---
  DateTimeColumn get createdAt => dateTime().nullable()();
}
An ID field is defined as:
IntColumn get id => integer().autoIncrement()();
This defines a field named id that is an IntColumn and auto increments
(automatically increments the id without you knowing what the next value
should be). You can have text fields defined as a TextColumn and a date
field defined as a DateTimeColumn. To create a Database, you create a
class that extends to a Drift built class, similar to the way freezed creates
its classes. The following is a sample:
@DriftDatabase(tables: [TodoItems, TodoCategory])
class AppDatabase extends _$AppDatabase {
}
The _$AppDatabase class will get generated for you. The
@DriftDatabase annotation defines the tables.
Movie configuration
TMDB has an API call that will get you information on all the image types
and sizes. This API is at https://api.themoviedb.org/3/configuration. This
API returns the base URL for images as well as the sizes. You build a URL
for each image from the base URL and a size. Instead of hard coding the
sizes and base URLs, you can download the configuration information and
store it in a local database.
First, we need to create a UI model for the configuration, use the following
steps:
1. Create a new file in the data/models folder named
movie_configuration.dart.
2. Add the following:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
part 'movie_configuration.freezed.dart';
part 'movie_configuration.g.dart';

--- Page 451 ---
@freezed
class MovieConfiguration with _$MovieConfiguration {
  const factory MovieConfiguration({
    @JsonKey(name: 'images')
    required MovieConfigurationImages images,
    @JsonKey(name: 'change_keys')
    required List<String> changeKeys,
  }) = _MovieConfiguration;
  factory MovieConfiguration.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$MovieConfigurationFromJson(json);
}
@freezed
class MovieConfigurationImages with _$MovieConfigurationImages {
  const factory MovieConfigurationImages({
    @JsonKey(name: 'base_url')
    required String baseUrl,
    @JsonKey(name: 'secure_base_url')
    required String secureBaseUrl,
    @JsonKey(name: 'backdrop_sizes')
    required List<String> backdropSizes,
    @JsonKey(name: 'logo_sizes')
    required List<String> logoSizes,
    @JsonKey(name: 'poster_sizes')
    required List<String> posterSizes,
    @JsonKey(name: 'profile_sizes')
    required List<String> profileSizes,
    @JsonKey(name: 'still_sizes')
    required List<String> stillSizes,
  }) = _MovieConfigurationImages;
  factory MovieConfigurationImages.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> 
json) => _$MovieConfigurationImagesFromJson(json);
}
This holds all the information on the movie images.

--- Page 452 ---
3. Create a new file in the data/models folder called models.dart
to hold the list of all the models for the UI. Add all of the models:
export 'genre.dart';
export 'movie_response.dart';
export 'movie_results.dart';
export 'movie_details.dart';
export 'movie_credits.dart';
export 'movie_videos.dart';
export 'movie_configuration.dart';
This is useful when you need several model imports. By importing this
file, you will get all models.
Images
Now that we have a configuration class, we can update our utility methods
for getting the image URL. Open utils.dart and replace
getImageUrl with the following:
String imageUrl(String baseUrl, String size, String file) => 
'$baseUrl$size$file';
String? getSizedImageUrl(ImageSize size, MovieConfiguration 
configuration, String? file) {
  if (file == null) {
    return null;
  }
  switch (size) {
    case ImageSize.small:
      return imageUrl(configuration.images.baseUrl, 
configuration.images.posterSizes[1], file);
    case ImageSize.large:

--- Page 453 ---
      return imageUrl(configuration.images.baseUrl, 
configuration.images.posterSizes[5], file);
  }
}
String? getMovieDetailsImagePath(
    MovieDetails details, MovieConfiguration configuration) {
  return getSizedImageUrl(ImageSize.large, configuration, 
details.backdropPath);
}
This uses the MovieConfiguration class to build the URL. The
getMovieDetailsImagePath method will return a larger image using
the backdropPath URL.
Database models
Now, we can start creating database models of genres and favorites. Genres
will just be a list of supported genres from TMDB. Favorites will be what
the user selects as a movie favorite and will be stored so that when they
restart the app, all of their favorites are listed. Now, start creating the
database models:
1. In the data folder, create a new folder named database.
2. In the database folder, create a new folder named models.
3. In the models folder, create a new file named genre.dart.
4. Add the following:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
part 'genre.freezed.dart';
part 'genre.g.dart';
@freezed
class DBMovieGenre with _$DBMovieGenre {
  const factory DBMovieGenre({
    required int id,
    required int remoteId,

--- Page 454 ---
    required String name,
  }) = _DBMovieGenre;
  // Add this private constructor
  const DBMovieGenre._();
  factory DBMovieGenre.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$DBMovieGenreFromJson(json);
}
5. Create a file named favorite.dart and add:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
part 'favorite.freezed.dart';
part 'favorite.g.dart';
@freezed
class DBFavorite with _$DBFavorite {
  const factory DBFavorite({
    required int id,
    required int movieId,
    required String backdropPath,
    required String posterPath,
    required bool favorite,
    required double popularity,
    required DateTime releaseDate,
    required String title,
    required String overview,
  }) = _DBFavorite;
  // Add this private constructor
  const DBFavorite._();
  factory DBFavorite.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$DBFavoriteFromJson(json);
}
Note that DBFavorite is more like MovieDetails than the
Favorite class. This is because we want to save all the details about
the movie without making another network call.
6. Next, create the file configuration.dart. This file will hold the

--- Page 455 ---
movie configuration information and has image sizing values:
import 'package:freezed_annotation/freezed_annotation.dart';
part 'configuration.freezed.dart';
part 'configuration.g.dart';
@freezed
class DBConfiguration with _$DBConfiguration {
  const factory DBConfiguration({
    required int id,
    required DBConfigurationImages images,
    required List<String> changeKeys,
  }) = _DBConfiguration;
  // Add this private constructor
  const DBConfiguration._();
  factory DBConfiguration.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> json) => 
_$DBConfigurationFromJson(json);
}
@freezed
class DBConfigurationImages with _$DBConfigurationImages {
  const factory DBConfigurationImages({
    required String baseUrl,
    required String secureBaseUrl,
    required List<String> backdropSizes,
    required List<String> logoSizes,
    required List<String> posterSizes,
    required List<String> profileSizes,
    required List<String> stillSizes,
  }) = _DBConfigurationImages;
  const DBConfigurationImages._();
  factory DBConfigurationImages.fromJson(Map<String, dynamic> 
json) => _$DBConfigurationImagesFromJson(json);
}
7. Next, create the file database_models.dart. This is called a
barrel file and holds all of the model files:

--- Page 456 ---
export 'configuration.dart';
export 'genre.dart';
export 'favorite.dart';
8. Then, type dart run build_runner build.
9. Now, add the drift plugins. In pubspec.yaml add the following:
  drift: ^2.20.2
  drift_flutter: ^0.2.0
  sqlite3_flutter_libs: ^0.5.24
  path_provider: ^2.1.4
  path: ^1.9.0
10. In the dev_dependencies section, add:
  drift_dev: ^2.20.3
11. Then, add the following to resolve some dependency conflicts:
dependency_overrides:
  web: ^1.0.0
12. In the database folder, create a new file named
database_interface.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/database_models.dart';
abstract class IDatabase {
  Future deleteDatabase();
  Future<List<DBMovieGenre>> getGenres();
  Future saveGenres(List<DBMovieGenre> genres);
  Future<DBConfiguration?> getMovieConfiguration();
  Future<DBConfiguration?> getMovieConfigurationById(int id);
  Future saveMovieConfiguration(DBConfiguration configuration);
  Future saveFavorite(DBFavorite favorite);
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id);
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites();
  Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites();
}

--- Page 457 ---
This will be the interface for all databases.
13. To create the drift database, create a new folder named drift in the
database folder.
14. Create the file movie_database.dart in the drift folder. Add:
import 'package:drift/drift.dart';
import 'package:drift_flutter/drift_flutter.dart';
part 'movie_database.g.dart';
class DriftConfigurationImages extends Table {
  // TODO Add fields
}
class DriftFavorite extends Table {
  // TODO Add fields
}
class DriftGenre extends Table {
  // TODO Add fields
}
@DriftDatabase(
  tables: [DriftFavorite, DriftConfigurationImages, DriftGenre],
)
class MovieDatabase extends _$MovieDatabase {
  MovieDatabase() : super(driftDatabase(name: 'Movies'));
  @override
  int get schemaVersion => 1;
}
This defines tables for movie image configuration, favorites, and genres.
The MovieDatabase class is pretty simple. Just pass in the name of
the movie file and annotate the class with the @DriftDatabase
annotation, which has all three tables.
15. Next, add the DriftConfigurationImages fields:
  IntColumn get id => integer().autoIncrement()();
  TextColumn get baseUrl => text()();
  TextColumn get secureBaseUrl => text()();

--- Page 458 ---
  TextColumn get backdropSizes => text()();
  TextColumn get logoSizes => text()();
  TextColumn get posterSizes => text()();
  TextColumn get profileSizes => text()();
  TextColumn get stillSizes => text()();
This defines an id field as well as URLs and size strings.
16. Next, add the DriftFavorite fields:
  IntColumn get id => integer().autoIncrement()();
  IntColumn get movieId => integer()();
  TextColumn get backdropPath => text()();
  TextColumn get posterPath => text()();
  BoolColumn get favorite => boolean()();
  RealColumn get popularity => real()();
  DateTimeColumn get releaseDate => dateTime()();
  TextColumn get title => text()();
  TextColumn get overview => text()();
17. Next, add the DriftGenre fields:
  IntColumn get id => integer().autoIncrement()();
  IntColumn get remoteId => integer()();
  TextColumn get name => text()();
18. Create the file drift_database.dart in the drift folder. This
file will do the work of retrieving and saving database information. Add
the following code:
import 'package:drift/drift.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/database_interface.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/database_models.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/drift/movie_database.dart';
class DriftDatabase implements IDatabase {

--- Page 459 ---
  final MovieDatabase movieDatabase = MovieDatabase();
  DriftDatabase();
  @override
  Future deleteDatabase() async {}
  @override
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites() async {
    // TODO Add getFavorites
  }
  @override
  Future<List<DBMovieGenre>> getGenres() async {
    // TODO Add getGenres
  }
  @override
  Future<DBConfiguration?> getMovieConfiguration() async {
    // TODO Add getMovieConfiguration
  }
  @override
  Future<DBConfiguration?> getMovieConfigurationById(int id) async 
{
    return getMovieConfiguration();
  }
  @override
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id) async {
    // TODO Add removeFavorite
  }
  @override
  Future saveFavorite(DBFavorite favorite) async {
    // TODO Add saveFavorite
  }
  @override
  Future saveGenres(List<DBMovieGenre> genres) async {
    // TODO Add saveGenres
  }
  @override
  Future saveMovieConfiguration(DBConfiguration configuration) 

--- Page 460 ---
async {
    // TODO Add saveMovieConfiguration
  }
  @override
  Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites() {
    // TODO Add streamFavorites
  }
}
19. Now, add the getFavorites code:
// 1
    final favorites = await movieDatabase.managers.driftFavorite.get();
    final dbFavorites = <DBFavorite>[];
    for (final favorite in favorites) {
// 2
      dbFavorites.add(DBFavorite(
          id: favorite.id,
          movieId: favorite.movieId,
          backdropPath: favorite.backdropPath,
          posterPath: favorite.posterPath,
          favorite: favorite.favorite,
          popularity: favorite.popularity,
          releaseDate: favorite.releaseDate,
          title: favorite.title,
          overview: favorite.overview));
    }
    return dbFavorites;
a. Drift creates a managers field that has a driftXXXX getter for each
table.
b. For each favorite, add a database favorite to the array.
20. Add the getGenres code:
    final genres = await movieDatabase.managers.driftGenre.get();
    final dbGenres = <DBMovieGenre>[];
    for (final genre in genres) {

--- Page 461 ---
      dbGenres.add(DBMovieGenre(
        id: genre.id,
        remoteId: genre.remoteId,
        name: genre.name,
      ));
    }
    return dbGenres;
This is similar to favorites but with genres.
21. Add the getMovieConfiguration code:
final images = await 
movieDatabase.managers.driftConfigurationImages.get();
    final dbImages = <DBConfigurationImages>[];
    for (final genre in images) {
      dbImages.add(DBConfigurationImages(
        baseUrl: genre.baseUrl,
        secureBaseUrl: genre.secureBaseUrl,
        backdropSizes: genre.backdropSizes.split(','),
        logoSizes: genre.logoSizes.split(‘,’),
        posterSizes: genre.posterSizes.split(','),
        profileSizes: genre.profileSizes.split(','),
        stillSizes: genre.stillSizes.split(','),
      ));
    }
    if (dbImages.isEmpty) {
      return null;
    }

--- Page 462 ---
    // Don't care about changeKeys
    return DBConfiguration(id: 1, images: dbImages[0], changeKeys: []);
This creates an array of image configurations.
22. Add the removeFavorite code:
    return await movieDatabase.driftFavorite
        .deleteWhere((table) => table.id.equals(id)) !=
        -1;
This will delete a favorite that has the passed in ID.
23. Add the saveFavorite code:
    movieDatabase.managers.driftFavorite.create((x) =>
        DriftFavoriteData(
          id: favorite.id,
          movieId: favorite.movieId,
          backdropPath: favorite.backdropPath,
          posterPath: favorite.posterPath,
          favorite: favorite.favorite,
          popularity: favorite.popularity,
          releaseDate: favorite.releaseDate,
          title: favorite.title,
          overview: favorite.overview,
        ));
This uses the create method to create a new favorite row in the database.
24. Add the saveGenre code:
    for (final genre in genres) {
      movieDatabase.managers.driftGenre.create((x) =>
          DriftGenreData(

--- Page 463 ---
              id: genre.id, remoteId: genre.remoteId, name: genre.name));
    }
This will go through the list and create new genre entries. This will
happen only once.
25. Add the saveMovieConfguration code:
    movieDatabase.managers.driftConfigurationImages
        .create((x) =>
        DriftConfigurationImagesCompanion.insert(
          baseUrl: configuration.images.baseUrl,
          secureBaseUrl: configuration.images.secureBaseUrl,
          backdropSizes: configuration.images.backdropSizes.join(','),
          logoSizes: configuration.images.logoSizes.join(‘,’),
          posterSizes: configuration.images.posterSizes.join(','),
          profileSizes: configuration.images.profileSizes.join(','),
          stillSizes: configuration.images.stillSizes.join(','),
        ));
This will create a movie image configuration row.
26. Add the streamFavorites code:
    return 
movieDatabase.managers.driftFavorite.watch().map((dbFavorites) {
      final favorites = <DBFavorite>[];
      for (final favorite in dbFavorites) {
        favorites.add(DBFavorite(id: favorite.id,
            movieId: favorite.movieId,
            backdropPath: favorite.backdropPath,
            posterPath: favorite.posterPath,
            favorite: favorite.favorite,

--- Page 464 ---
            popularity: favorite.popularity,
            releaseDate: favorite.releaseDate,
            title: favorite.title,
            overview: favorite.overview));
      }
      return favorites;
    });
Drift supports streams. Using the watch method returns a stream, and
then we follow that with a map, which will convert the returned type
into one we can work with.
Movie view model
Now that you have the repository done, you need to update the
MovieViewModel to use it. Open movie_viewmodel.dart. Follow
these steps:
1. After the movieAPIService field, add the following:
    final IDatabase database;
2. Add a movie configuration field:
  MovieConfiguration? movieConfiguration;
3. Remove the following:
  Stream<List<Favorite>>? favoriteStream;
  List<Favorite>? favoriteList;
4. Change the constructor to:
  MovieViewModel({required this.movieAPIService, required 
this.database});
5. Change setupConfiguration to:
    Future setupConfiguration() async {
    final response = await movieAPIService.getMovieConfiguration();

--- Page 465 ---
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      movieConfiguration = 
MovieConfiguration.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError(
          'Failed to load genres with error ${response.statusCode} and 
message ${response.statusMessage}');
    }
  }
6. Add the following method:
  String? getImageUrl(ImageSize size, String? file) {
    if (file == null || movieConfiguration == null) {
      logMessage('movieConfiguration is null for getImageUrl file: $file');
      return null;
    }
    return getSizedImageUrl(size, movieConfiguration!, file);
  }
7. Remove streamFavorites and updateFavorite and replace it
with:
    Future saveFavorite(MovieDetails movieDetails) async {
    database.saveFavorite(DBFavorite(
        id: movieDetails.id,
        movieId: movieDetails.id,
        backdropPath: movieDetails.backdropPath,
        posterPath: movieDetails.posterPath,
        favorite: true,
        popularity: movieDetails.popularity,
        releaseDate: movieDetails.releaseDate,
        title: movieDetails.title,

--- Page 466 ---
        overview: movieDetails.overview));
  }
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id) async {
    return database.removeFavorite(id);
  }
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites() async {
    return database.getFavorites();
  }
  Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites() {
    return database.streamFavorites();
  }
8. Open up providers.dart to add new providers and update the
viewmodel provider. Add the following:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
MovieAPIService movieAPIService(MovieAPIServiceRef ref) => 
MovieAPIService();
9. Then change movieViewModel to:
  final database = await ref.read(driftDatabaseProvider.future);
  final model = MovieViewModel(database: database, 
movieAPIService:  ref.read(movieAPIServiceProvider));
  await model.setup();
  return model;
10. At the end of the file add:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<IDatabase> driftDatabase(DriftDatabaseRef ref) {
  return Future.value(DriftDatabase());
}
This adds a provider for the drift database.
11. Then type dart run build_runner build.
12. Open favorite_screen.dart.

--- Page 467 ---
13. Change Favorite to DBFavorite everywhere in the file.
14. In the onFavoritesTap call, change the setState code with the
following:
removeFavorite(favorite);
15. Change the removeFavorite method to:
    await movieViewModel.removeFavorite(favorite.id);
    setState(() {});
16. In vert_favorite_list.dart change Favorite to
DBFavorite.
17. In favorite_row.dart change Favorite to DBFavorite.
18. Change the imageUrl field to:
final imageUrl = movieViewModel.getImageUrl(ImageSize.small, 
favorite.posterPath);
19. Since imageUrl will be null if there is no value, remove the if
(imageUrl.isNotEmpty) check and the else block of code.
20. Change the CachedNetworkImage call to:
                child: imageUrl != null ? CachedNetworkImage(
                  imageUrl: imageUrl,
                  alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                  fit: BoxFit.cover,
                  height: 140,
                  width: 100,
                ): emptyWidget,
21. Change the Title string to favorite.title.
22. Change the '1972' text to yearFormat.format(favorite.releaseDate).
23. In utils.dart, change the OnFavoriteResultsTap to use a DBFavorite.
24. Change all calls of getImageUrl to call the movieViewModel's
getImageUrl in all files. (do a find and replace).

--- Page 468 ---
Cleanup
There are a few files that need to be cleaned up due to all of the changes.
Start with home_screen_image.dart:
1. Change the CachedNetworkImage call to:
                    child: imageUrl != null
                        ? CachedNetworkImage(
                            imageUrl: imageUrl,
                            alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                            fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                            height: 374,
                            width: screenWidth,
                          )
                        : emptyWidget,
2. In horiz_movies.dart change the extended class from
StatelessWidget to ConsumerWidget to allow us to get the
movie view model.
3. Change the build method to:
  Widget build(BuildContext context, WidgetRef ref) {
4. Then add and wrap the SizedBox with:
    final movieAsync = ref.watch(movieViewModelProvider);
    return movieAsync.when(
      error: (e, st) => Text(e.toString()),
      loading: () => Container(),
      data: (viewModel) {
5. Change the imageUrl and MovieWidget to:
                final imageUrl =
                    viewModel.getImageUrl(ImageSize.small, 

--- Page 469 ---
movies[index].posterPath);
                return imageUrl != null ? MovieWidget(
                  movieId: movies[index].id,
                  movieUrl: imageUrl,
                  onMovieTap: onMovieTap,
                  movieType: movieType,
                ) : emptyWidget;
6. In detail_image.dart add a movieConfiguration field and
change the constructor to:
  final MovieConfiguration movieConfiguration;
  const DetailImage(
      {super.key, required this.details, required this.movieConfiguration});
7. Change the imageUrl definition to:
final imageUrl = getMovieDetailsImagePath(widget.details, 
widget.movieConfiguration);
This method is a bit different as it uses the backdropPath and a large
image.
8. Change the CachedNetworkImage call to:
                child: imageUrl != null ? CachedNetworkImage(
                  imageUrl: imageUrl,
                  alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                  fit: BoxFit.fitWidth,
                  height: 200,
                  width: screenWidth,
                ) : emptyWidget,
9. In movie_detail.dart, add the following after the
movieVideos field definition:

--- Page 470 ---
  List<DBFavorite> favorites = [];
  int currentFavoriteId = -1;
10. After setting the movieViewModel in the data: (viewModel),
add the following:
        getFavorites();
11. Add the following two methods:
  Future getFavorites() async {
    favorites = await movieViewModel.getFavorites();
    favoriteNotifier.value = isMovieFavorite(widget.movieId);
  }
  bool isMovieFavorite(int id) {
    return favorites.firstWhereOrNull((favorite) => favorite.movieId == 
id) != null;
  }
12. Import the collection.dart package (for
firstWhereOrNull).
13. Change the call to DetailImage to:
       DetailImage(
          details: movieDetails,
          movieConfiguration:
          movieViewModel.movieConfiguration!,
       ),
14. Change the onFavoriteSelected callback to:
      onFavoriteSelected: () async {
          if (favoriteNotifier.value) {
             if (currentFavoriteId != -1) {
                movieViewModel

--- Page 471 ---
                       .removeFavorite(currentFavoriteId);
             }
               favoriteNotifier.value = false;
           } else {
               currentFavoriteId = movieDetails.id;
               await movieViewModel
                      .saveFavorite(movieDetails);
               favoriteNotifier.value = true;
           }
         },
15. Change the call to HorizontalCast to:
   HorizontalCast(movieViewModel: movieViewModel, castList: 
credits?.cast ?? []),
16. Open horiz_cast.dart, add the movie view model, and change
the constructor:
  final MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  const HorizontalCast({required this.movieViewModel, required 
this.castList, super.key});
17. Change the CastImage call to:
          var imageUrl = movieViewModel.getImageUrl(ImageSize.small, 
castList[index].profilePath);
          return imageUrl != null ? CastImage(imageUrl: imageUrl, name: 
castList[index].name): emptyWidget;
18. Open movie_row.dart and remove the check for imageUrl
being empty.
19. Change the CachedNetworkImage call to:
                  child: imageUrl != null
                      ? CachedNetworkImage(

--- Page 472 ---
                          imageUrl: imageUrl,
                          alignment: Alignment.topCenter,
                          fit: BoxFit.cover,
                          height: 142,
                          width: 100,
                        )
                      : emptyWidget,
Since the app has had multiple plugins added, you will need to stop and
restart it. Rerun the app and test the added features:
• Try selecting multiple genres on the Genre screen. Stop/restart the app to
see if they are still there.
• In a Movie detail screen, click the favorite button and then go to the
favorites page to see if it is there.
• Click on the favorite button in the favorites screen to make sure it is
removed.
• Go back to the detail screen of a favorite movie and ensure the favorite
button is red.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned all about SharedPreferences and how you can
save key/value data. You saved selected genre information. You could also
have saved information like whether the user chose a light/dark theme or any
other information that can be contained as a basic dart type. You then
explored different databases and used the drift database to save genre, movie
configuration, and favorite information. This will provide cached genre and
movie configuration and allow the user to save their favorite movies.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to modify your app to work on the
web and the desktop. Two great platforms that expand the reach of your
apps. You will learn how to handle menus for desktop apps as well as adjust
your UI to handle larger screens. You will also learn how to deploy web apps
using Firebase hosting. You will then be able to create desktop apps for
macOS and Windows.

--- Page 473 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 474 ---
CHAPTER 13
Web and Desktop
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn how to run Flutter apps on desktop platforms
like macOS, Windows, and Linux, as well as on the web. You will create
menus for desktop apps that allow the app to perform more like native apps.
Learn about some of the issues when running on the web and learn how to
make your UIs more adaptive to the width of larger screens. Learn how to
use navigation rails instead of the bottom navigation on the desktop and
web. Finally, you will host your web app on Firebase Hosting so that others
can see it.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Other platforms
• MacOS
• Menus
• AdaptiveScaffold
• Windows
• Web
• Firebase Hosting

--- Page 475 ---
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will know how to create desktop apps for
Mac and Windows, as well as menus. You will know how to create an
adaptive UI that can expand and change based on the size of the screen. You
will have created a web app that solves database issues, allowing your
database to run on the web.
MacOS
One of the great benefits of Flutter is that it can run not only on mobile
devices but also on the desktop and web. Most of the time, there are not
many changes needed to get the app to work on these platforms. Since these
platforms have different forms and inputs, they will have different needs.
The most obvious is the size difference. The user usually has more room to
display information on the desktop and the web. To account for those
differences, you may want to show different layouts. If you are familiar with
Gmail, you will notice that on the web, there is a list of labels on the left, and
you can split your screen into email lists and content. To use the same code,
you would break your UI into different components and display them in
different holders, depending on the platform. For example, you could have a
list of emails as one component that would show up as one screen on a
phone but just a part of a larger screen on the desktop or web. You also have
menus on desktop platforms that allow you to easily access different parts of
the app. Usually, there will be a file menu with all of the actions you can do
to files and an edit menu for cut, copy, paste, and so on. You would then
have app-specific menus, like accessing search.
If you are using a Mac or have seen one used, you know that each app has a
window with three colored icons in the top left of the window that allows a
user to close, minimize, and expand that window. Mac apps also have a
menu system that is built into the screen’s top row. This usually has the
System Apple menu, a menu with the app’s name, and any app-specific
menu. Usually, Mac apps are developed in Xcode, and you can edit the
menus there. To fully understand how this works, open up Xcode and
navigate to your app’s macOS folder.
1. Choose File | Open:

--- Page 476 ---
Figure 13.1: macOS folder
Click the Open button. This will open the correct file for the project. If
you click on the Runner folder on the left, you should see the
following:

--- Page 477 ---
Figure 13.2: Runner general screen
This is the General screen and has the targeted macOS version, App
Category, Display Name, and Bundle Identifier. Some of these values
have already been added when the project was created but you can
change them here. For example, you can add a Display Name and
version numbers.
2. Go back to the Runner screen and click on Signing & Capabilities.
Select the Outgoing Connections (Client) checkbox:

--- Page 478 ---
Figure 13.3: Connections
3. In Android Studio, change the device from your current phone to
macOS (desktop) and run the app. You should see just the movies menu,
as follows:

--- Page 479 ---
Figure 13.4: Movie menu
4. To fix the lowercase movie name, return the Xcode and enter a Display
Name:


--- Page 480 ---
Figure 13.5: Display name
5. Then open Runner/Runner/Configs/AppInfo. Change
movies to Movies:
Figure 13.6: AppInfo
Stop and restart the app. You may encounter the following dialog. Select
Open Anyway:
Figure 13.7: Debug running
This should happen just during development. Your app should work and
look as follows:

--- Page 481 ---
Figure 13.8: macOS app
Menus
Menus are now built into Flutter but do not work on all platforms yet. The
PlatformMenu and the PlatformMenuItem are used to define menu
items. These classes define a label and, in the case of PlatformMenu, a
list of menus of type PlatformMenuItem. The PlatformMenuItem
has an onSelected parameter that is used to handle the user selecting the
menu. You can also provide a shortcut or keyboard command. To create your
own set of menus you will use Flutter code to create the menus and add them
before the MaterialApp call. This will not affect mobile devices. One of
the problems with the menu system is that it sits above all of the screens, and
a way to communicate the selection of a menu item to the rest of the app is
needed. There are several ways to handle this. We will use the EventBus

--- Page 482 ---
package. This is a package that allows classes to subscribe or listen to
events. Any class can send events.
1. Add the EventBus package to pubspec.yaml:
  event_bus: ^2.0.0
2. Do a Pub get.
3. In the ui folder, create the file menus.dart. We will start by adding
a few event classes. Add:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter/services.dart';
import 'package:movies/providers.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
sealed class MenuEvent {}
class QuitEvent extends MenuEvent {}
class HomeEvent extends MenuEvent {}
class GenreEvent extends MenuEvent {}
class FavoritesEvent extends MenuEvent {}
class SearchEvent extends MenuEvent {}
class SearchMovieEvent extends MenuEvent {
  final String searchText;
  SearchMovieEvent(this.searchText);
}
This defines a top level MenuEvent class that all the other classes
extend. Most of these do not have any information attached to them,
except for the SearchMovieEvent, which has a searchText
string used for a search.
4. Next, create the MenuManager class:
class MenuManager {
  final ProviderRef ref;

--- Page 483 ---
  MenuManager(this.ref);
  List<PlatformMenu> createMenus() {
    return [
      createMovieMenu(),
      createOptionsMenu(),
    ];
  }
}
This class just takes a Riverpod ProviderRef so that it can access
other providers. The main createMenus method will return a list of
menus.
5. Next, add the createMovieMenu method at the end of the class:
  PlatformMenu createMovieMenu() {
    return PlatformMenu(label: 'Movies', menus: [
      PlatformMenuItem(
          label: 'Quit',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(QuitEvent()),
          shortcut: const SingleActivator(LogicalKeyboardKey.keyQ, meta: 
true)),
    ]);
  }
This returns a PlatformMenu with a label and just a Quit menu
item. This will fire a Quit event. We will create the
eventBusProvider later. Notice the SingleActivator. This is
used to allow the user to use the keyboard for keyboard commands. In
this case, Command+Q is to quit the app. On Windows, this will be
Ctrl+Q.
6. Next, create an options menu:

--- Page 484 ---
  PlatformMenu createOptionsMenu() {
    return PlatformMenu(label: 'Options', menus: [
      PlatformMenuItem(
          label: 'Home',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(HomeEvent()),
          shortcut: const SingleActivator(LogicalKeyboardKey.keyH, meta: 
true)),
      PlatformMenuItem(
          label: 'Genre',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(GenreEvent()),
          shortcut: const SingleActivator(LogicalKeyboardKey.keyG, meta: 
true)),
      PlatformMenuItem(
          label: 'Favorites',
          onSelected: () => 
ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(FavoritesEvent()),
          shortcut: const SingleActivator(LogicalKeyboardKey.keyF, meta: 
true)),
      PlatformMenuItem(
          label: 'Search',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(SearchEvent()),
          shortcut: const SingleActivator(LogicalKeyboardKey.keyS, meta: 
true)),
    ]);
  }
a. This creates four menus:
• Home: Go to the home page
• Genre: Go to the genre page
• Favorites: Go to the favorites page
• Search: Bring up the search dialog
7. Open up providers.dart. Add:
final searchTextProvider = StateProvider<String>((ref) {

--- Page 485 ---
  return '';
});
final currentIndexProvider = StateProvider<int>((ref) {
  return 0;
});
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
MenuManager menuManager(MenuManagerRef ref) => 
MenuManager(ref);
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
EventBus eventBus(EventBusRef ref) => EventBus();
The first provider just stores the current search string. The second is to
keep track of the current index and the third is for the menu manager
and the fourth is for the EventBus.
8. In the terminal, type:
 dart run build_runner build.
9. Open main.dart. In the build method, wrap the MaterialApp
so that the build method now looks like:
    final router = ref.watch(appRouterProvider);
    final menuManager = ref.watch(menuManagerProvider);
    return PlatformMenuBar(
      menus: menuManager.createMenus(),
      child: MaterialApp.router(
        routerConfig: router.config(),
        title: 'Movies',
        debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
        theme: createTheme(),
      ),

--- Page 486 ---
    );
This wraps MaterialApp with a PlatformMenuBar and calls our
createMenus method. Stop and restart your Mac app. Your menus
should look like the following:
Figure 13.9: macOS menus
Platforms
One question you may have is, How do I tell which platform I am on?
Flutter has a Platform class that answers these questions. This is found in
the dart:io package. The steps are as follows:
1. Open utils.dart.
2. Add the following:
import 'dart:io';
import 'package:flutter/foundation.dart';
bool isWeb() {
  return kIsWeb;
}
bool isDesktop() {
  if (kIsWeb) {
    return false;
  }
  return Platform.isWindows || Platform.isLinux || Platform.isMacOS;
}
bool isMobile() {
  if (kIsWeb) {
    return false;
  }

--- Page 487 ---
  return Platform.isIOS || Platform.isAndroid;
}
bool isMac() {
  if (kIsWeb) {
    return false;
  }
  return Platform.isMacOS;
}
bool isWindows() {
  if (kIsWeb) {
    return false;
  }
  return Platform.isWindows;
}
The kIsWeb constant is from Flutter and is how you tell if you are running
a web app. For desktop, we check the different desktop platforms. For
mobile, we check for iOS and Android. If you need to check for Mac or
Windows specifically, use the last two methods.
DesktopWindow
One noticeable difference between mobile and desktop is the use of a free
floating window to hold your app's content. These windows can be resized
quite a bit. At some point, when making the window smaller, your app
becomes unusable. To prevent that, there is a package called
DesktopWindow. This package only has a few methods, but they are very
helpful. Here are a few of these methods:
• setWindowSize
• setMinWindowSize
• setMaxWindowSize
• setFullScreen
We will be using the setWindowSize and setMinWindowSize
methods. The steps are as follows:
1. Add the DesktopWindow package to pubspec.yaml:

--- Page 488 ---
  desktop_window: ^0.4.0
2. Do a Pub get.
3. Open main.dart. Add the following before the runApp call:
  if (isDesktop()) {
    await DesktopWindow.setWindowSize(const Size(700, 600));
    await DesktopWindow.setMinWindowSize(const Size(700, 600));
  }
Stop and run the app, and you will see that you cannot make your
window size smaller than 700x600. You will see some errors related to
SQLite. To fix these, update the drift libraries to newer versions.
4. In pubspec.yaml change:
drift: ^2.20.2
And in dev_dependencies:
drift_dev: ^2.20.3
AdaptiveScaffold
As we mentioned, desktop windows can be resized. It would be nice if we
could change the layout when the screen changes sizes. If you had an email
app, you could show just the list of emails when the screen is small but show
the list and the contents of the email when the screen gets bigger. Enter the
Flutter Adaptive Scaffold package. This package adapts to a variety of
screens and has presets for different screen sizes. This package divides the
screen as follows:

--- Page 489 ---
Figure 13.10: Screen layout
Currently, the movie app just has body and bottom navigation elements. One
nice feature of desktop apps is the use of a navigation rail. This is a smaller
navigation item that can be placed on the left or right. We still want to use a
BottomNavigationBar on a small mobile device but use a
NavigationRail on larger devices. The body is the primary screen that
takes up the space left by the navigational elements. The secondaryBody
acts as an option to split the space between two panes for purposes such as
having a detailed view. To make this change, we will update the
main_screen.dart file. This will be almost a complete rewrite. The
steps are as follows:
1. Open pubspec.yaml. Add:
  flutter_adaptive_scaffold: ^0.3.1
2. Do a Pub get.
3. Open the main_screen.dart file.
4. Replace the code with:

--- Page 490 ---
class MainScreen extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  const MainScreen({super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<MainScreen> createState() => _MainScreenState();
}
class _MainScreenState extends ConsumerState<MainScreen> {
  int currentIndex = 0;
  List<Widget> tabScreens = [];
  // TODO add other methods
}
5. Add the initState method:
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
// 1
    tabScreens.add(const HomeScreen());
    tabScreens.add(const GenreScreen());
    tabScreens.add(const FavoriteScreen());
// 2
   ref.read(eventBusProvider).on<MenuEvent>().listen((event) {
      switch (event) {
        case HomeEvent():
          setState(() {
            currentIndex = 0;
            ref.read(currentIndexProvider.notifier).state = currentIndex;
          });
        case GenreEvent():
          setState(() {
            currentIndex = 1;
            ref.read(currentIndexProvider.notifier).state = currentIndex;
          });

--- Page 491 ---
        case FavoritesEvent():
          setState(() {
            currentIndex = 2;
            ref.read(currentIndexProvider.notifier).state = currentIndex;
          });
        case QuitEvent():
          SystemNavigator.pop();
        case SearchEvent():
// 3
          showDialog(
              context: context, builder: (context) => const SearchDialog());
        case SearchMovieEvent():
// 4
          ref.read(searchTextProvider.notifier).state = event.searchText;
          currentIndex = 1;
          ref.read(currentIndexProvider.notifier).state = currentIndex;
      }
    });
  }
a. Here we have the following:
1. Add screens to a list to avoid re-creating the screens each time.
2. Listen for event bus events.
3. Set the current index.
4. Set the current index in the provider.
5. Show the search dialog. (SearchDialog not written yet)
6. Set the search text for the SearchMovieEvent.
AdaptiveLayout
Next, we will be adding the AdaptiveLayout:
1. Open the main_screen.dart file.
2. Add the build method:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {

--- Page 492 ---
// 1
    currentIndex = ref.watch(currentIndexProvider);
// 2
    return AdaptiveLayout(
// 3
      primaryNavigation: SlotLayout(
        config: <Breakpoint, SlotLayoutConfig>{
          Breakpoints.mediumAndUp: SlotLayout.from(
              key: const Key('PrimaryNavigation'),
              builder: (_) {
// 4
                return AdaptiveScaffold.standardNavigationRail(
                  padding: const EdgeInsets.all(0),
                  destinations: const [
                    NavigationRailDestination(
                      icon: Icon(Icons.home),
                      label: Text('Home'),
                    ),
                    NavigationRailDestination(
                      icon: Icon(Symbols.genres),
                      label: Text('Genre'),
                    ),
                    NavigationRailDestination(
                      icon: Icon(Icons.favorite),
                      label: Text('Favorites'),
                    ),
                  ],
                  onDestinationSelected: (int index) {
                    setState(() {
                      currentIndex = index;
                      ref.read(currentIndexProvider.notifier).state = 
currentIndex;
                    });
                  },
                  selectedIndex: currentIndex,

--- Page 493 ---
                  backgroundColor: Colors.black,
                );
              })
        },
      ),
// 5
      body: SlotLayout(config: <Breakpoint, SlotLayoutConfig?>{
        Breakpoints.standard: SlotLayout.from(
            key: const Key('body'),
            builder: (_) {
              return Scaffold(
                body: tabScreens[currentIndex],
              );
            }),
      }),
// 6
      bottomNavigation: SlotLayout(
        config: <Breakpoint, SlotLayoutConfig?>{
          Breakpoints.small: SlotLayout.from(
            key: const Key('bottomNavigation'),
            builder: (_) => SizedBox(
              height: 80,
              child: BottomNavigationBar(
                currentIndex: currentIndex,
                onTap: (index) {
                  setState(() {
                    currentIndex = index;
                    ref.read(currentIndexProvider.notifier).state = currentIndex;
                  });
                },
                items: const <BottomNavigationBarItem>[
                  BottomNavigationBarItem(
                    icon: Icon(Icons.home),
                    label: 'Home',

--- Page 494 ---
                  ),
                  BottomNavigationBarItem(
                    icon: Icon(Symbols.genres),
                    label: ‘Genre’,
                  ),
                  BottomNavigationBarItem(
                    icon: Icon(Icons.favorite),
                    label: 'Favorites',
                  ),
                ],
              ),
            ),
          ),
        },
      ),
    );
  }
Here, we use the AdaptiveLayout and set three items:
• primaryNavigation: This will be a navigation rails for medium and
higher screens.
• Body: This will be our screens.
• bottomNavigation: This will be a bottom navigation bar on small
screens.
Here is a description of the code:
1. Get the current index.
2. Use the AdaptiveLayout for the top level widget.
3. For the primary navigation, use a SlotLayout for medium size layouts.
4. Create a navigation rail on the left side.
5. For the body, use the tab screens.
6. For the bottom, use a BottomNavigationBar for a small display.
Search dialog

--- Page 495 ---
Now that we have the event for searching, we need to create a search dialog.
Flutter has a system method called showDialog that displays a modal
dialog with the given content. The steps are as follows:
1. In the genres folder, create the new file search_dialog.dart.
2. Add the following:
import 'package:auto_route/auto_route.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:movies/providers.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/menus.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
class SearchDialog extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {
  const SearchDialog({super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<SearchDialog> createState() => _SearchDialogState();
}
class _SearchDialogState extends ConsumerState<SearchDialog> {
  TextEditingController searchTextController = TextEditingController();
  @override
  void dispose() {
    searchTextController.dispose();
    super.dispose();
  }
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
  // TODO Add AlertDialog
  }
}
This creates a widget with a text controller for the search value.
3. Add the code for the dialog:
    final query = MediaQuery.of(context);
    final width = query.size.width * 0.7;
    const height = 300.0;
    return AlertDialog(

--- Page 496 ---
      contentPadding: const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(24.0, 0.0, 0.0, 24.0),
      shape: RoundedRectangleBorder(borderRadius: 
BorderRadius.circular(10.0)),
      content: SizedBox(
        width: width,
        height: height,
        child: SingleChildScrollView(
          child: SizedBox(
            width: width,
            height: height,
            child: Column(
              crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.center,
              children: [
                Expanded(
                  child: TextField(
                    cursorColor: Colors.black,
                    decoration: const InputDecoration(
                      border: InputBorder.none,
                      hintText: 'Search Movies',
                      // hintStyle: TextStyle(color: Colors.black),
                    ),
                    autofocus: true,
                    style: const TextStyle(color: Colors.black),
                    textInputAction: TextInputAction.done,
                    onSubmitted: (value) {
                      
ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(SearchMovieEvent(value));
                      context.router.maybePop();
                    },
                    controller: searchTextController,
                  ),
                ),
                Row(

--- Page 497 ---
                  mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.center,
                  children: [
                    ElevatedButton(
                        onPressed: () => context.router.maybePop(),
                        child: const Text('Cancel')),
                    addHorizontalSpace(8),
                    ElevatedButton(
                        onPressed: () {
                          ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(
                              SearchMovieEvent(searchTextController.text));
                          context.router.maybePop();
                        },
                        child: const Text('Search'))
                  ],
                )
              ],
            ),
          ),
        ),
      ),
    );
This is just a TextField and two buttons: one to cancel and one to
send a search event. To implement this event we need to make some
changes to the GenreScreen.
4. Open genre_screen.dart.
5. Remove the currentSearchString field.
6. Add a new field:
  final searchTextNotifier = ValueNotifier<String>('');
7. In the buildScreen method add the following before the return.
    final searchText = ref.watch(searchTextProvider);
    if (searchText != searchTextNotifier.value) {

--- Page 498 ---
      searchTextNotifier.value = searchText;
      currentMovieResponse = null;
      expandedNotifier.value = false;
      search();
    }
8. Change the call to GenreSearchRow to:
         ValueListenableBuilder<String>(
              valueListenable: searchTextNotifier,
              builder: (BuildContext context, String value, Widget? child) {
                  return GenreSearchRow(searchTextNotifier.value, 
(searchString) {
                     searchTextNotifier.value = searchString;
                     currentMovieResponse = null;
                     FocusScope.of(context).unfocus();
                     expandedNotifier.value = false;
                     search();
                   });
                 },
            ),
9. Change all instances of currentSearchString to
searchTextNotifier.value.
Next, we need to change GenreSearchRow. The steps are as follows:
1. Open genre_search_row.dart.
2. Add a new field and change the constructor:
  final String searchText;
  final OnSearch onSearch;
  const GenreSearchRow(this.searchText, this.onSearch, {super.key});

--- Page 499 ---
3. Change the movieTextController to:
late TextEditingController movieTextController = 
TextEditingController(text: widget.searchText);
4. Remove the initState method as it is not needed any more.
5. At the beginning of the build method, add:
    movieTextController.text = widget.searchText;
Do a hot restart and try selecting the search menu. It should bring up the
search dialog and take you to the genre screen with search results. Try the
other menu items and make sure they take you to the given screen.
You should see the navigation rails on the left, as shown in the following
figure:
Figure 13.11: Navigation rails
Windows
In addition to the Mac, Flutter runs on Windows. Very little needs to be done
to get it to work. However, the one area that still needs work is the menus.
On Windows, menus are in the window itself. This window is part of the
Windows operating system and not Flutter. Currently, the
PlatformMenuBar only works on Mac. To create menus on Windows,
we need a plugin that helps. There are a lot of packages that put a menu
inside of the Flutter canvas but not in the window. We will use an older
menubar plugin that will help until PlatformMenuBar works on
Windows.

--- Page 500 ---
On Windows, running the app should look as follows:
Figure 13.12: Windows version
To add the menu package, do the following:
1. Add the menubar package to pubspec.yaml:
  menubar:
    git:
      url: https://github.com/google/flutter-desktop-embedding
      path: plugins/menubar
      ref: 12decbe0f592e14e03223f6f2c0c7e0e2dbd70a1
This uses a different way to bring in a plugin. This uses git, specifying a
URL, path, and a commit reference.
2. Do a Pub get.
3. Open menus.dart. Add:

--- Page 501 ---
  void createWindowsMenus() {
    setApplicationMenu([
      createWindowsMovieMenu(),
      createWindowsOptionsMenu(),
    ]);
  }
  NativeSubmenu createWindowsMovieMenu() {
    return NativeSubmenu(label: 'Movies', children: [
      NativeMenuItem(
          label: 'Quit',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(QuitEvent()),
          shortcut: LogicalKeySet(
              LogicalKeyboardKey.control, LogicalKeyboardKey.keyQ)),
    ]);
  }
  NativeSubmenu createWindowsOptionsMenu() {
    return NativeSubmenu(label: 'Options', children: [
      NativeMenuItem(
          label: 'Home',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(HomeEvent()),
          shortcut: LogicalKeySet(
              LogicalKeyboardKey.control, LogicalKeyboardKey.keyH)),
      NativeMenuItem(
          label: 'Genre',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(GenreEvent()),
          shortcut: LogicalKeySet(
              LogicalKeyboardKey.control, LogicalKeyboardKey.keyG)),
      NativeMenuItem(
          label: 'Favorites',
          onSelected: () => 
ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(FavoritesEvent()),
          shortcut: LogicalKeySet(
              LogicalKeyboardKey.control, LogicalKeyboardKey.keyF)),

--- Page 502 ---
      NativeMenuItem(
          label: 'Search',
          onSelected: () => ref.read(eventBusProvider).fire(SearchEvent()),
          shortcut: LogicalKeySet(
              LogicalKeyboardKey.control, LogicalKeyboardKey.keyS)),
    ]);
  }
This uses the menubar package to create menus.
4. Open main.dart. Replace the code in _MainAppState with:
var initialized = false;
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
// 1
    WidgetsBinding.instance.addPostFrameCallback((_) {
      if (initialized) {
        return;
      }
// 2
      if (isWindows()) {
        final menuManager = ref.read(menuManagerProvider);
        menuManager.createWindowsMenus();
      }
      initialized = true;
    });
    final router = ref.watch(appRouterProvider);
    final menuManager = ref.watch(menuManagerProvider);
    if (isMac()) {
// 3
      return PlatformMenuBar(
        menus: menuManager.createMenus(),
        child: MaterialApp.router(
          routerConfig: router.config(),
          title: 'Movies',

--- Page 503 ---
          debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
          theme: createTheme(),
        ),
      );
    } else {
// 4
      return MaterialApp.router(
        routerConfig: router.config(),
        title: 'Movies',
        debugShowCheckedModeBanner: false,
        theme: createTheme(),
      );
    }
}
This code will add a PostFrameCallback that will be called when the
build method finishes drawing. The steps are as follows:
1. Add a callback to be called when UI finishes drawing.
2. If we are on Windows, create the menus (only once).
3. If we are on a Mac, use the PlatformMenuBar class for menus.
4. Otherwise just use a MaterialApp.
On Windows, run the app. You should see two menus, namely, the Movies
and Option menus (Figure 13.13). If you are a regular Windows user, you
will notice that this is not exactly what Windows apps look like but is closer
than other plugins. Until PlatformMenuBar works with Windows, there
will have to be work arounds:

--- Page 504 ---
Figure 13.13: Windows menus
Web
The web version of Flutter is unique from other platforms. It compiles and
renders in three different running ways:
• HTML: Uses HTML elements and CSS to render the UI. This has been
deprecated.
• CanvasKit: Uses the Skia graphics engine. It is slower to load but
renders fast.
• WebAssembly: It compiles to a binary format that the web can
understand.
To get our app to run on the web, we must make several changes, mostly
related to the database. Since Flutter updates quite frequently and our web
folder is now pretty old, it is time to recreate the folder. Since we have not

--- Page 505 ---
added any of our files to this folder, it is okay to delete them. Follow these
steps:
1. Delete the web folder.
2. From the terminal type:
flutter create --platforms web .
flutter config --enable-web
3. Delete the newly created widget_test.dart in the test folder. This
should create an updated index.html file. If the web folder was
created with an earlier version of generated code, or you have problems
running on the web, this is a good way to fix issues. However, if you
have made any custom changes, you must back up the folder first and
then copy your changes. As we are using the drift package, we will need
a special file: sqlite3.wasm. You can find this file in the project
resources for this chapter.
4. Copy sqlite3.wasm and drift_worker.js to the web folder.
5. In the data/database/drift folder, create a new file named
connection.dart. Add the following:
// We use a conditional export to expose the right connection factory 
depending
// on the platform.
export 'unsupported.dart'
if (dart.library.js) 'web.dart'
if (dart.library.ffi) 'native.dart';
6. Create a new file named native.dart. Add:
import 'dart:io';
import 'package:drift/drift.dart';
import 'package:drift/native.dart';
import 'package:path_provider/path_provider.dart';
import 'package:path/path.dart' as p;
DatabaseConnection connect() {
  return DatabaseConnection.delayed(Future(() async {

--- Page 506 ---
    final dbFolder = await getApplicationDocumentsDirectory();
    final file = File(p.join(dbFolder.path, 'movies.sqlite'));
    return NativeDatabase.createBackgroundConnection(file);
  }));
}
This will get the application directory and create a file named
movies.sqlite and then create a DatabaseConnection.
7. Create a new file unsupported.dart. Add:
import 'package:drift/drift.dart';
Never _unsupported() {
  throw UnsupportedError(
      'No suitable database implementation was found on this platform.');
}
// Depending on the platform the app is compiled to, the following stubs 
will
// be replaced with the methods in native.dart or web.dart
DatabaseConnection connect() {
  _unsupported();
}
Future<void> validateDatabaseSchema(GeneratedDatabase database) 
async {
  _unsupported();
}
This is used when there is an unsupported version of Flutter.
8. Create a new file web.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:drift/drift.dart';
import 'package:drift/wasm.dart';
import 'package:flutter/foundation.dart';
DatabaseConnection connect() {
    return DatabaseConnection.delayed(
      Future.sync(() async {
        final db = await WasmDatabase.open(
          databaseName: ‘movies’,

--- Page 507 ---
          sqlite3Uri: Uri.parse(‘/sqlite3.wasm’),
          driftWorkerUri: Uri.parse('/drift_worker.js'),
        );
        if (db.missingFeatures.isNotEmpty) {
          debugPrint('Using ${db.chosenImplementation} due to 
unsupported '
              'browser features: ${db.missingFeatures}');
        }
        return db.resolvedExecutor;
      }),
    );
}
This will use the sqlite3.wasm and drift_worker.js file to
create a database file on the web.
9. Open movie_database.dart and add the following import:
import 'package:movies/data/database/drift/connection.dart' as impl;
10. Change the constructor to:
  MovieDatabase() : super(impl.connect());
Unfortunately, the dotenv package does not work on the web, and the web
cannot load files with a dot in the file name, so we need to copy this file and
then read it from the assets folder. The steps are as follows:
1. Copy the .env file to dotenv.
2. Add the following after the .env in the pubspec.yaml file:
    - dotenv
3. Update movie_api_service.dart.
a. Change the definition of the apiKey to:
  late String apiKey;
b. Change the constructor and add another method:
    MovieAPIService();
  Future init() async {
    if (!isWeb()) {

--- Page 508 ---
      apiKey = dotenv.env['TMDB_KEY']!;
      configureDio();
    } else {
      await webLoad();
    }
  }
  Future webLoad() async {
    try {
      final dotEnvString = await rootBundle.loadString('dotenv');
      if (dotEnvString.contains('TMDB_KEY')) {
        final parts = dotEnvString.split('=');
        if (parts.length == 2) {
          apiKey = parts[1];
          if (apiKey.contains("'")) {
            apiKey = apiKey.replaceAll("'", "");
          }
        }
      } else {
        apiKey = dotEnvString;
      }
    } catch (e) {
      print(e);
    }
    configureDio();
  }
This will load the dotenv file and get the API key. Then, we will call
the configureDio method.
4. Update utils.dart. Change the getSizedImageUrl method to
use the secure base URL, as websites do not like the http non-secured
links.
String? getSizedImageUrl(ImageSize size, MovieConfiguration 
configuration, String? file) {
  if (file == null) {

--- Page 509 ---
    return null;
  }
  switch (size) {
    case ImageSize.small:
      return imageUrl(configuration.images.secureBaseUrl, 
configuration.images.posterSizes[1], file);
    case ImageSize.large:
      return imageUrl(configuration.images.secureBaseUrl, 
configuration.images.posterSizes[5], file);
  }
}
5. Change main.dart to not load the .env file if on the web:
  if (!isWeb()) {
    await dotenv.load(fileName: '.env');
  }
6. Open providers.dart and replace the movieAPIService and
movieViewModel with:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<MovieAPIService> movieAPIService(MovieAPIServiceRef ref) 
async {
  final service = MovieAPIService();
  await service.init();
  return service;
}
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<MovieViewModel> movieViewModel(MovieViewModelRef 
ref) async {
  final database = await ref.read(driftDatabaseProvider.future);
  final service = await ref.read(movieAPIServiceProvider.future);

--- Page 510 ---
  final model = MovieViewModel(database: database, 
movieAPIService: service);
  await model.setup();
  return model;
}
7. In the terminal, type the following:
 dart run build_runner build.
Run the app on the web. Try different pages and notice any problems. One
issue you may encounter is problems loading images. Since all these images
are from the internet, some websites do not allow you to use them on a web
page. This is called cross-origin resource sharing (CORS). This is a
security mechanism implemented in browsers to prevent web pages from
accessing resources from other domains. Some sites like TMDB allow you to
use their images freely while others like YouTube make you use their APIs
instead. To fix this, we will change the Trailer class. The steps are as
follows:
1. Open trailers.dart.
2. Change the CachedNetworkImage call to:
                      CachedNetworkImage(
                        imageUrl: youtubeImageFromId(movieVideo.key),
                        alignment: Alignment.topLeft,
                        fit: BoxFit.fitHeight,
                        height: 98,
                        errorWidget: (_,__,___) => const Placeholder(),
                      ),
This will show a placeholder widget when there is an error. Seeing the
Favorites screen on the web shows an overflow problem. To fix that, do the
following:
1. Open widgets/favorite_row.dart.
2. Remove the textWidth variable.

--- Page 511 ---
3. Wrap the Stack widget with an Expanded widget.
4. Remove the SizedBox widget surrounding the AutoSizeText.
This should make the favorite row fit better.
Firebase Hosting
When you build a web project, you need a place to host your web page.
There are many ways to do this, but Firebase Hosting is an easy way to host
your site. This will require some configuration and setup of Firebase. We
will also need to change some of our Dart code to handle web issues. To
start, you will need to set up Firebase:
1. Go to https://console.firebase.google.com/ and sign up or log in if you
already have an account.
2. Create a new project.
Figure 13.14: New project
3. Type a name for the project and press Continue, as shown in Figure
13.15:

--- Page 512 ---
Figure 13.15: Analytics
4. Disable analytics (unless you want it) and press Create project, as done
in Figure 13.16. You will see the following screen while Firebase
creates your project:


--- Page 513 ---
Figure 13.16: Loading
5. When finished, press Continue. The screen is as follows:
Figure 13.17: Project finished
6. Add a new web app. You should see a set of icons for the different types
of projects you can create. Click on the </> icon:
Figure 13.18: Add web app
7. In the following screen, give your app a name, click the checkbox for
Firebase Hosting and then click on Register app:

--- Page 514 ---
Figure 13.19: Adding Firebase to web app
8. Deploy to Firebase Hosting page:

--- Page 515 ---
Figure 13.20: Deploy setup
9. Install the Firebase tools:

--- Page 516 ---
npm install -g firebase-tools
10. Login to Firebase:
firebase login
11. Initialize Hosting:
firebase init
You should see the following output:
Figure 13.21: Firebase initialization
Choose the Use an existing project option if you have one
already created or Create a new Project if not.
12. Choose hosting. You will see the following output:

--- Page 517 ---
Figure 13.22: Setup
13. Open firebase.json and add your site below the hosting
section:
"site": "<your site name>",
14. Deploy the project using the following command:
Firebase deploy
You will see the following output:
Figure 13.23: Deploying
15. Click on the Hosting URL link to see the page:

--- Page 518 ---
Figure 13.24: Website
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have learned how to create apps for the Mac, Windows,
and the web. You know how to create menus for desktop platforms, and you
have created an adaptive layout that can be adapted to many different form
factors. You have also created a dialog for doing searches. You took the leap
onto the web and learned about many of the issues with developing websites.
You were able to host the site on Firebase, which will allow others to view
the work you have done.
In the next chapter, you will learn all about user input and gestures. This will
be helpful for apps that require field entry and note taking, as well as
handling different types of gestures, like tapping, long pressing, and more.

--- Page 519 ---
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 520 ---
CHAPTER 14
Handling User Input and Gestures
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn how to handle user input. There are many
ways to capture a user's input, from buttons to text fields. Buttons are the
most common input method and provide a variety of styling options to
indicate different states. You will learn about the all-important
GestureDetector widget for handling taps and other gestures. Ink
widgets are a great way to provide splash feedback for a user pressing your
widgets. You will learn about repositories and how to separate your code to
make it easier to switch components. And finally, you will implement
infinite scrolling and paging API calls to show a complete list of movies.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• User input and event handling
• GestureDetector
• Focus management
• Text
• Ink widgets
• KeyboardListener
• Repositories

--- Page 521 ---
• Movie listing
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will know how to handle events from
several different input types and how to handle focus management. You will
learn how to handle gestures such as taps, long presses, and keyboard
entries for specific widgets. You will learn about Ink widgets, part of
Google's Material Design. You will learn how to create a repository and
separate database and network API calls. You will also learn how to create
an infinite scrolling list of movies.
User input and event handling
User input and event handling are important for building interactive and
responsive Flutter applications. They allow your app to react to user
actions, such as taps, gestures, keyboard input, and more. As you have seen
in the movie app, the user will tap on a movie to go to the detail page. If
they are on a desktop machine, they will usually click with a mouse, and if
they are on a tablet, they can use a stylus. For desktop apps, using the
keyboard and keyboard shortcuts makes your app more useable for power
users, while touch is the most common input source on mobile devices.
Flutter provides the GestureDetector widget to detect various touch
gestures like taps, drags, scaling, and more. GestureDectector also
handles mouse clicks on desktop and web apps. For text input, Flutter's
TextField and TextFormField widgets handle text input, while
FocusNode and FocusScope manage keyboard focus and navigation.
You can also use RawKeyboardListener for lower-level keyboard
event handling. Flutter can also handle input from game controllers,
accessibility devices, and other platform-specific input mechanisms.
For the desktop, changing the cursor when in different areas of the app
helps the user know what to do in that area. For example, when moving the
mouse over a text field, you can change the cursor to a text input cursor as
follows:
MouseRegion(
                cursor: SystemMouseCursors.text,

--- Page 522 ---
                child: TextField(),
)
Callback functions are the core of event handling in Flutter. These functions
are triggered when specific events occur, such as a button tap, text field
change, or gesture detection.
GestureDetector
The GestureDetector widget in Flutter is the main widget for
capturing and responding to user interactions with your app. It is a powerful
tool that allows you to detect a wide range of gestures, from simple taps to
complex multi-touch gestures like pinch-to-zoom. GestureDetector
itself does not have a visual representation. It acts as an invisible wrapper
around its child widget, capturing user interactions on that child. It listens
for pointer events (touches, mouse clicks, etc.) on its child and attempts to
recognize specific gestures for the provided callbacks. You provide callback
functions to the GestureDetector for the gestures you want to detect.
These callbacks are triggered when the corresponding gesture is recognized.
There are many different methods GestureDetector handles:
• onTap
• onDoubleTap
• onLongPress
• onPanUpdate
• onScaleUpdate
These are just a few of the provided methods. There are other methods for
secondary and tertiary taps. If you want to handle panning or scaling an
image, use the following methods:
• onPanDown
• onPanStart
• onPanUpdate
• onPanEnd

--- Page 523 ---
• onPanCancel
Similar methods exist for scaling. For dragging, there are several callbacks
to use:
• onVerticalDragDown
• onVerticalDragStart
• onVerticalDragUpdate
• onVerticalDragEnd
• onVerticalDragCancel
There are callbacks for Horizontal drags as well. You have seen instances of
GestureDetector in classes like FavoriteRow:
GestureDetector(
      onTap: () => onMovieTap(favorite.movieId)
You will mostly just use the onTap method, but the other methods exist for
more complex interactions.
Focus management
The FocusManager class plays a central role in managing focus within
your application. It acts as a singleton service that provides access to the
focus tree and offers methods for controlling focus behavior. The
FocusManager maintains the focus tree, tracks the primary focus, and
sends key events to the primary focus. It also maintains the rootScope,
which is the top-level scope for focus nodes. You can get an instance of the
FocusManager with:
FocusManager focusManager = FocusManager.instance;
There are only a few methods you can use with the FocusManager:
• addEarlyKeyEventHandler: Handle key events before widgets
• addLateKeyEventHandler: Handle key events if not handled by other
widgets

--- Page 524 ---
You will not usually use the FocusManager as the FocusNode class is
used with widgets. Flutter's focus management system is key to controlling
which widget receives input from the keyboard or other input devices. It
ensures a smooth and intuitive user experience, especially when dealing
with forms, text fields, and interactive elements. On a mobile device, the
keyboard's next arrow will go to the next focusable widget, while on the
desktop or web, the tab key will move to the next widget.
FocusNode is a fundamental class for managing focus in Flutter. Each
widget that wants to receive focus needs to be associated with a
FocusNode. You will create one focus node for each TextField.
FocusNodes form a hierarchical tree structure that mirrors the widget
tree. This tree helps determine the flow of focus between widgets. Setting
the autofocus property to true on a TextField automatically gives it
focus when it is first built. The easiest way to programmatically request
focus for a widget is to use focusNode.requestForcus() for the
focus node associated with that widget. You can attach a listener to a
FocusNode to be notified when its focus state changes by calling
addListener(). This allows you to perform actions or update the UI
based on focus events. Here is a sample code that detects when the focus is
lost and sets the editing flag to false:
    textFocusNode.addListener(() {
      if (!textFocusNode.hasFocus && widget.editing) {
        setState(() {
          widget.editing = false;
        });
      }
    });
FocusNode methods:
• hasFocus: Indicates whether the FocusNode currently has focus.
• requestFocus(): Requests focus on the associated widget.
• unfocus(): Removes focus from the associated widget.
• addListener(): Allows you to listen for focus changes on the

--- Page 525 ---
FocusNode.
A FocusScope defines a subtree in the focus tree. It allows you to
manage focus within that subtree, such as moving focus to the next or
previous widget within the scope.
Each FocusScope is associated with a FocusScopeNode, which is a
special type of FocusNode that manages the focus within its scope. You
will typically only need these if you use a FocusScope.
FocusScopeNode methods:
• requestFocus(): Requests focus for a specific FocusScopeNode
within the scope.
• nextFocus(): Moves focus to the next focusable widget in the scope.
• previousFocus(): Moves focus to the previous focusable widget in the
scope.
• unfocus(): Removes focus from any focused widget within the scope.
If you need to have a grouped set of widgets with their own specialized
traversal policy, you will use a FocusTraversalGroup. This widget
has a FocusTraversalPolicy to determine how focusable widgets are
traversed. This is more complex than you really need, but if you have a
large screen with a lot of form widgets and you need to have different
traversal policies for each, this will be the widget you need. There are some
predefined policies like WidgetOrderTraversalPolicy (which is
just the order in which the widgets were created) or
ReadingOrderTraversalPolicy (which is the natural ready order).
You can use OrderedTraversalPolicy to specify a specific order.
Text
TextField widgets in Flutter are the primary way to capture text input
from users. They are versatile and offer a range of features for creating
various input experiences, from simple single line entries to complex multi-
line text editors. Here is a closer look at how they work and contribute to
event handling. The TextField widget offers callbacks like onChanged
(for text changes), onSubmitted (for text submission), and
onEditingComplete (for editing completion). You can set a

--- Page 526 ---
FocusNode on a TextField by setting the focusNode field with an
instance of a FocusNode. You can make a TextField multi-line by
using these fields:
                  keyboardType: TextInputType.multiline,
                  maxLines: null,
To listen for text changes, use a statement like:
                    onChanged: (String text) => _phone = text,
For a final submitted text value, use:
onSubmitted: (value) {},
To change the keyboard type for different fields, use the keyboardType
parameter. This can be:
• TextInputType.text
• TextInputType.decimal
• TextInputType.number
• TextInputType.phone
• TextInputType.datetime
• TextInputType.emailAddress
• TextInputType.url
• TextInputType.visiblePassword
• TextInputType.name
• TextInputType.streetAddress
To set the action button on the keyboard, use the textInputAction
field. These can be:
• TextInputAction.done
• TextInputAction.go
• TextInputAction.search
• TextInputAction.send

--- Page 527 ---
• TextInputAction.previous
• TextInputAction.continueAction (iOS – Return key)
• TextInputAction.join (iOS – Return Key Join)
• TextInputAction.route (iOS – route)
• TextInputAction.newline – carriage return
• TextInputAction.emergencyCall
For passwords, you need to set the obsureText field to true. Here is a
sample showing a TextField with a few fields set:
TextField(
                        
                        autofocus: true,
                        focusNode: textFocusNode,
                        textInputAction: TextInputAction.done,
                        onSubmitted: (value) {
// Handle text value
                        },
                        controller: searchTextController,
                      ), 
Ink widgets
Ink widgets are part of Material Design's widgets. This is made up of
widgets like:
• Ink
• InkWell
• InkResponse
Ink will draw a color or decoration under the child, while the InkWell
will draw on top of an Ink widget. The InkWell widget provides

--- Page 528 ---
material style visual feedback (like ripple effects) when a user interacts with
certain areas of the UI. It handles taps and clicks, making them ideal for
buttons and clickable UI elements. InkWell is an ink splash effect that
makes your UI feel responsive. It is a great way to provide visual feedback
to users when they interact with tappable elements. You can change the
splash color and the radius of the splash, as well as a few more fields, to
customize the look of the splash. InkWell relies on the
GestureDectector to handle taps. It handles all types of taps and
hovers (entering and exiting the area) with the onHover callback, mouse
cursors for desktop and web, and can use different colors for different
states. InkWell requires a Material ancestor. This can be the
MaterialApp at the root of your UI, or it can be wrapped in a Material
widget. Be careful when using containers with colors, as this will cause the
ripple effect not to work. Here is an example of an InkWell inside of an
Ink widget. This shows a green square that, when tapped has a blue ripple
effect:
            Ink(
              color: Colors.green,
              width: double.infinity,
              height: 300,
              child: InkWell(
                  splashColor: Colors.blue,
                  onTap: () {},
                  child: const Center(child: Text('Tap Me'))),
            ),
InkResponse
InkWells are designed for rectangular areas, while InkResponses can
be of any shape. You can use the splashFactory field to define an
InteractiveInkFeatureFactory instance. You can use existing
factories such as InkRipple.splashFactory and
InkSplash.splashFactory or create your own. This class has most

--- Page 529 ---
of the same fields as an InkWell but is more customizable.
InkResponses can clip splashes that extend outside of its bounds. To set
the shape used to highlight when pressed or focused, use the
highlightShape field. You can change borders and many different
colors:
• Focus
• Hover
• Highlight
• Overlay
• Splash
KeyboardListener
KeyboardListener is a widget in Flutter that allows you to listen to
and respond to raw keyboard events in your application. It gives you lower-
level access to keyboard input, enabling you to build custom interactions or
handle scenarios where the standard focus-based input handling might not
be sufficient. The onKeyEvent field is the primary callback function that
is triggered whenever a key event occurs. It receives a KeyEvent object as
an argument, which contains information about the key that was pressed or
released. This event contains the physicalKey, which represents the
physical key that was pressed or released (e.g.,
PhysicalKeyboardKey.keyA,
PhysicalKeyboardKey.arrowUp). The logicalKey represents
the logical key, which considers modifiers like Shift or Alt (e.g.,
LogicalKeyboardKey.keyA,
LogicalKeyboardKey.shiftLeft). The character is the Unicode
character string that would be produced by the key press (if applicable).
Note that the character field is not available on key up events. The event
you get will either be a KeyUpEvent or a KeyDownEvent, indicating
what type of event it is. Here is an example of a KeyboardListener
wrapping a TextField that will handle the enter or escape keys:
KeyboardListener(
          focusNode: textFocusNode,

--- Page 530 ---
          onKeyEvent: (event) {
            if (event.runtimeType == KeyDownEvent &&
                ((event.logicalKey == LogicalKeyboardKey.enter) ||
                    (event.logicalKey == LogicalKeyboardKey.escape))) {
              setState(() {
                // Do something when these events happen
              });
            }
          },
          child: TextField()
)
You also saw the SingleActivator class used in your menus. This is a
shortcut that uses the LogicalKeyboardKey.
Repositories
Notice that we now have several different types of models. We have models
that the UI uses and models that the database uses. This is because database
models may have different fields (like IDs) that the UI does not need. Your
UI may only show a small portion of the data downloaded. To solve this
problem, you need to convert database models to UI models and the
reverse. To do this, create a set of methods to convert from one model type
to another:
1. Create a new file called model_converter.dart in the
database folder.
2. Add the methods for converting genres:
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/database_models.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/models.dart';
List<Genre> databaseGenreToGenre(List<DBMovieGenre> 
databaseGenres) {

--- Page 531 ---
  return databaseGenres
      .map((databaseGenre) =>
          Genre(id: databaseGenre.remoteId, name: databaseGenre.name))
      .toList();
}
List<DBMovieGenre> movieGenreToDatabaseGenre(List<Genre> 
genres) {
  return genres
      .map((genre) =>
      DBMovieGenre(id: genre.id, remoteId: genre.id, name: 
genre.name))
      .toList();
}
The first method takes a list of database genres and converts them to a
list of genres and the second converts genres to database genres.
3. Add the movie configuration methods:
MovieConfiguration? 
databaseMovieConfigurationToMovieConfiguration(
    DBConfiguration? databaseMovieConfiguration) {
  if (databaseMovieConfiguration == null) {
    return null;
  }
  return MovieConfiguration(
    images: 
databaseImagesToImages(databaseMovieConfiguration.images),
    changeKeys: databaseMovieConfiguration.changeKeys,
  );

--- Page 532 ---
}
DBConfiguration? movieConfigurationToDbConfiguration(
    MovieConfiguration movieConfiguration) {
  final dbConfiguration = DBConfiguration(id: 1, images: 
imagesToDbImages(movieConfiguration.images),
      changeKeys: [...movieConfiguration.changeKeys]);
  return dbConfiguration;
}
4. Add the configuration image methods:
MovieConfigurationImages 
databaseImagesToImages(DBConfigurationImages databaseImages) {
  return MovieConfigurationImages(
    baseUrl: databaseImages.baseUrl,
    secureBaseUrl: databaseImages.secureBaseUrl,
    backdropSizes: databaseImages.backdropSizes,
    logoSizes: databaseImages.logoSizes,
    posterSizes: databaseImages.posterSizes,
    profileSizes: databaseImages.profileSizes,
    stillSizes: databaseImages.stillSizes,
  );
}
DBConfigurationImages 
imagesToDbImages(MovieConfigurationImages images) {
  final dbImages = DBConfigurationImages(
    baseUrl: images.baseUrl,
    secureBaseUrl: images.secureBaseUrl,

--- Page 533 ---
    backdropSizes: [...images.backdropSizes],
    logoSizes: [...images.logoSizes],
    posterSizes: [...images.posterSizes],
    profileSizes: [...images.profileSizes],
    stillSizes: [...images.stillSizes],
  );
  return dbImages;
}
Sources
Interfaces are a great way to define a set of methods but have different
implementations. To do this, we will create a MovieSource interface that
will define the methods required for implementing a class of type
MovieSource. This class will be abstract so that it cannot be created by
itself.
1. In the data folder, create a new folder named sources.
2. Create a new file named movie_source.dart.
3. Add the following interface:
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/favorite.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/models.dart';
abstract class MovieSource {
  Future<List<Genre>> getGenres();
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTrending(int page);
  Future<MovieResponse?> getNowPlaying(int page);
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTopRated(int page);
  Future<MovieResponse?> getPopular(int page);
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMovies(String query, int page);
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMoviesByGenre(String genre, int 
page);
  Future<MovieDetails?> getMovieDetails(int movieId);
  Future<MovieVideos?> getMovieVideos(int movieId);

--- Page 534 ---
  Future<MovieConfiguration?> getMovieConfiguration();
  Future<MovieCredits?> getMovieCredits(int movieId);
  Future saveFavorite(MovieDetails movieDetails);
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id);
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites();
  Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites();
}
This defines some of the methods that we have already used. We will
now create two sources: one for the database and one for the network
API.
4. Create a new file named network_movie_source.dart. Add:
import 'package:lumberdash/lumberdash.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/favorite.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/models.dart';
import 'package:movies/network/movie_api_service.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/sources/movie_source.dart';
class NetworkMovieSource implements MovieSource {
  final MovieAPIService _movieAPIService;
  NetworkMovieSource(this._movieAPIService);
  // TODO implement methods
}
5. Add the getGenres method:
  @override
  Future<List<Genre>> getGenres() async {
    final response = await _movieAPIService.getGenres();
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return Genres.fromJson(response.data).genres;
    } else {

--- Page 535 ---
      logError('Failed to load genres with error ${response.statusCode} 
and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return [];
    }
  }
This uses the movie service to get the genre list, convert the data from
JSON and return the result.
6. Add the getTrending method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTrending([int page = 1]) async {
    final response = await _movieAPIService.getTrending(page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load trending movies with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
7. Add the getNowPlaying method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getNowPlaying([int page = 1]) async {
    final response = await _movieAPIService.getNowPlaying(page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load now playing movies with error 

--- Page 536 ---
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
8. Add the getTopRated method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTopRated([int page = 1]) async {
    final response = await _movieAPIService.getTopRated(page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load top rated movies with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
9. Add the getPopular method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getPopular([int page = 1]) async {
    final response = await _movieAPIService.getPopular(page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load popular movies with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;

--- Page 537 ---
    }
  }
10. Add the getMovieConfiguration method:
  @override
  Future<MovieConfiguration?> getMovieConfiguration() async {
    final response = await _movieAPIService.getMovieConfiguration();
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieConfiguration.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load movie configuration with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
11. Add the getMovieCredits method:
  @override
  Future<MovieCredits?> getMovieCredits(int movieId) async {
    final response = await 
_movieAPIService.getMovieCredits(movieId);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieCredits.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load movie credits with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }

--- Page 538 ---
  }
12. Add the getMovieDetails method:
  @override
  Future<MovieDetails?> getMovieDetails(int movieId) async {
    final response = await 
_movieAPIService.getMovieDetails(movieId);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      try {
        return MovieDetails.fromJson(response.data);
      } catch (e) {
        logError('Failed to parse movie details with error $e');
        return null;
      }
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load movie details with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
13. Add the getMovieVideos method:
  @override
  Future<MovieVideos?> getMovieVideos(int movieId) async {
    final response = await 
_movieAPIService.getMovieVideos(movieId);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieVideos.fromJson(response.data);

--- Page 539 ---
    } else {
      logError('Failed to load movie details with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
14. Add the searchMovies method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMovies(String query, [int page = 1]) 
async {
    final response = await _movieAPIService.searchMovies(query, 
page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {
      return MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('searchMovies failed movies with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
15. Add the searchMoviesByGenre method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMoviesByGenre(String genre, [int 
page = 1]) async {
    final response = await 
_movieAPIService.searchMoviesByGenre(genre, page);
    if (response.statusCode == 200) {

--- Page 540 ---
      return MovieResponse.fromJson(response.data);
    } else {
      logError('searchMoviesByGenre failed with error 
${response.statusCode} and message ${response.statusMessage}');
      return null;
    }
  }
16. Add the saveFavorite method:
  @override
  Future<int> saveFavorite(MovieDetails movieDetails) async {
    return 0;
  }
This method is not used for the network API so it just returns 0.
17. Add the removeFavorite method:
  @override
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id) async {
    return false;
  }
This is not used as well.
18. Add the getFavorites method:
  @override
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites() async {
    return <DBFavorite>[];
  }
This is not used.
19. Add the streamFavorites method:
  @override

--- Page 541 ---
  Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites() {
    return Stream.value(<DBFavorite>[]);
  }
Now that you have the network source, you can create a database source.
This will contain only the methods needed to access the database.
Create a new file in the sources directory named
database_source.dart. Add the following:
import 'package:movies/data/models/models.dart';
import 
'package:movies/data/database/drift/database_inter
face.dart';
import 
'package:movies/data/database/model_converter.dart
';
class DatabaseSource {
  final IDatabase? _database;
  DatabaseSource(this._database);
  Future<List<Genre>> getGenres() async {
    final genres = <Genre>[];
    if (_database == null) {
      return genres;
    }
    final networkGenres = await 
_database.getGenres();
    
genres.addAll(databaseGenreToGenre(networkGenres))
;
    return genres;
  }

--- Page 542 ---
  Future<MovieConfiguration?> movieConfiguration() 
async {
    if (_database == null) {
      return null;
    }
    return 
databaseMovieConfigurationToMovieConfiguration(
        await _database.getMovieConfiguration());
  }
}
This is pretty simple, as we only save genres and the configuration to the
database.
Repository
Just as we have abstracted out the different sources, we want to separate out
calling the database and the network. To do that, we want to create a
repository class that will call either the database or the network APIs,
depending on the call. This class will implement the MovieSource
interface. Next, create the MovieRepository class:
1. In the data folder, create a new folder named repository.
2. Create a new file named movie_repository.dart. Add the
following:
import 'package:lumberdash/lumberdash.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/favorite.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/drift/database_interface.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/model_converter.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/models/models.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/sources/movie_source.dart';
class MovieRepository implements MovieSource {

--- Page 543 ---
  final MovieSource _movieSource;
  final IDatabase? _database;
  MovieRepository(this._movieSource, this._database);
}
This takes in both the movie source and the database interface. Note
that by using the database interface, we can test this repository. (See
Chapter 18, Testing and Performance)
3. Add the getGenres method:
  @override
  Future<List<Genre>> getGenres() async {
    try {
      final dbMovieGenres = await _database?.getGenres();
      if (dbMovieGenres?.isEmpty == true) {
        final genres = await _movieSource.getGenres();
        await 
_database?.saveGenres(movieGenreToDatabaseGenre(genres));
        return genres;
      }
      if (_database == null) {
        return [];
      }
      return databaseGenreToGenre(dbMovieGenres!);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getGenres: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
      return [];

--- Page 544 ---
    }
  }
This uses the database interface to get the genre list. If this does not
exist, we call the network movie source to get the list of genres and
then save the genres to the database. This should only happen once, as
subsequent calls will just retrieve the data from the database and save a
call to the network.
4. Add the getTrending method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTrending(int page) async {
    try {
      return _movieSource.getTrending(page);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getTrending: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
5. Add the getNowPlaying method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getNowPlaying(int page) async {
    try {
      return _movieSource.getNowPlaying(page);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getNowPlaying: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }

--- Page 545 ---
    return null;
  }
6. Add the getTopRated method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTopRated(int page) async {
    try {
      return _movieSource.getTopRated(page);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage(‘getTopRated: ${e.toString()}’);
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
7. Add the getPopular method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> getPopular(int page) async {
    try {
      return _movieSource.getPopular(page);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getPopular: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
8. Add the getMovieConfiguration method:
  @override

--- Page 546 ---
  Future<MovieConfiguration?> getMovieConfiguration() async {
    try {
      final dbMovieConfiguration = await 
_database?.getMovieConfiguration();
      if (dbMovieConfiguration == null) {
        final movieConfiguration = await 
_movieSource.getMovieConfiguration();
        if (movieConfiguration == null) {
          return null;
        }
        final dbConfiguration =
            movieConfigurationToDbConfiguration(movieConfiguration);
        await _database?.saveMovieConfiguration(dbConfiguration!);
        return movieConfiguration;
      }
      return databaseMovieConfigurationToMovieConfiguration(
          dbMovieConfiguration);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getMovieConfiguration: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
This will first check the database for the configuration information. If it
has not been stored, retrieve it using the movie source and save it to the
database.
9. Add the getMovieCredits method:

--- Page 547 ---
  @override
  Future<MovieCredits?> getMovieCredits(int movieId) async {
    try {
      return _movieSource.getMovieCredits(movieId);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getMovieCredits: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
10. Add the getMovieDetails method:
  @override
  Future<MovieDetails?> getMovieDetails(int movieId) async {
    try {
      return _movieSource.getMovieDetails(movieId);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getMovieDetails: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
11. Add the getMovieVideos method:
  @override
  Future<MovieVideos?> getMovieVideos(int movieId) async {
    try {

--- Page 548 ---
      return _movieSource.getMovieVideos(movieId);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getMovieVideos: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
12. Add the searchMovies method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMovies(String query, int page) async 
{
    try {
      return _movieSource.searchMovies(query, page);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('searchMovies: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
13. Add the searchMoviesByGenre method:
  @override
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMoviesByGenre(String genre, int 
page) async {
    try {
      return _movieSource.searchMoviesByGenre(genre, page);
    } catch (e) {

--- Page 549 ---
      logMessage('searchMoviesByGenre: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return null;
  }
Use the movie source to search for movies by genre.
14. Add the saveFavorite method:
  @override
  Future saveFavorite(MovieDetails movieDetails) async {
    if (_database == null) {
      return;
    }
    try {
      final favorite = DBFavorite(
          id: movieDetails.id,
          movieId: movieDetails.id,
          backdropPath: movieDetails.backdropPath,
          posterPath: movieDetails.posterPath,
          favorite: true,
          popularity: movieDetails.popularity,
          releaseDate: movieDetails.releaseDate,
          title: movieDetails.title,
          overview: movieDetails.overview);
      _database.saveFavorite(favorite);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('saveFavorite: ${e.toString()}');

--- Page 550 ---
      logError(e);
    }
  }
This method saves a favorite to the database.
15. Add the removeFavorite method:
  @override
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id) async {
    if (_database == null) {
      return false;
    }
    try {
      return _database.removeFavorite(id);
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('removeFavorite: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return false;
  }
This will remove a favorite from the database.
16. Add the getFavorites method:
  @override
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites() async {
    if (_database == null) {
      return [];
    }
    try {

--- Page 551 ---
      return _database.getFavorites();
    } catch (e) {
      logMessage('getFavorites: ${e.toString()}');
      logError(e);
    }
    return [];
  }
This will get the list of favorites saved to the database.
17. Add the streamFavorites method:
 @override
 Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites() {
    if (_database == null) {
      return Stream.value(<DBFavorite>[]);
    }
    return _database.streamFavorites();
  }
This will stream favorites from the database so that when the database is
updated, the UI will also update.
MovieViewModel
Now that you have the repository done, you need to update the
MovieViewModel to use it. Open movie_viewmodel.dart and
change all methods to use the new repository:
1. Instead of directly using the API service, change:
  final MovieAPIService movieAPIService;
To:
  final MovieSource _movieRepository;
Remove:

--- Page 552 ---
    final IDatabase database;
Change the constructor to:
  MovieViewModel(this._movieRepository);
2. Change setupConfiguration to:
  Future setupConfiguration() async {
    final configuration = await 
_movieRepository.getMovieConfiguration();
    if (configuration != null) {
      movieConfiguration = configuration;
    }
  }
3. Change setupGenres to:
  Future setupGenres() async {
    movieGenres = await _movieRepository.getGenres();
  }
4. Remove streamFavorites. Replace the following methods:
  Future saveFavorite(MovieDetails movieDetails) async {
     _movieRepository.saveFavorite(movieDetails);
  }
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id) async {
    return _movieRepository.removeFavorite(id);
  }
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites() async {
    return _movieRepository.getFavorites();
  }
  Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites() {

--- Page 553 ---
    return _movieRepository.streamFavorites();
  }
5. Replace the getXXXMovies calls with:
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTrendingMovies(int page) async {
    final response = await _movieRepository.getTrending(page);
    if (response != null) {
      trendingMovies = response.results;
    }
    return response;
  }
  Future<MovieResponse?> getPopular(int page) async {
    final response = await _movieRepository.getPopular(page);
    if (response != null) {
      popularMovies = response.results;
    }
    return response;
  }
  Future<MovieResponse?> getTopRated(int page) async {
    final response = await _movieRepository.getTopRated(page);
    if (response != null) {
      topRatedMovies = response.results;
    }
    return response;
  }
  Future<MovieResponse?> getNowPlaying(int page) async {

--- Page 554 ---
    final response = await _movieRepository.getNowPlaying(page);
    if (response != null) {
      nowPlayingMovies = response.results;
    }
    return response;
  }
6. Replace the rest of the methods with:
  Future<MovieDetails?> getMovieDetails(int movieId) async {
    return _movieRepository.getMovieDetails(movieId);
  }
   Future<MovieVideos?> getMovieVideos(int movieId) async {
    return _movieRepository.getMovieVideos(movieId);
  }
  Future<MovieCredits?> getMovieCredits(int movieId) async {
    return _movieRepository.getMovieCredits(movieId);
  }
 /// genres is a pipe delimited string
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMoviesByGenre(String genres, int 
page) async {
    final response = await 
_movieRepository.searchMoviesByGenre(genres, page);
    if (response != null) {
      nowPlayingMovies = response.results;
    }
    return response;
  }
  Future<MovieResponse?> searchMovies(String searchText, int page) 
async {
    final response = await _movieRepository.searchMovies(searchText, 
page);
    if (response != null) {

--- Page 555 ---
      nowPlayingMovies = response.results;
    }
    return response;
  }
7. Open up providers.dart to add new providers and update the
viewmodel provider.
8. After movieAPIService, add:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<MovieSource> networkMovieSource(NetworkMovieSourceRef 
ref) async {
  final service = await ref.read(movieAPIServiceProvider.future);
  return NetworkMovieSource(service);
}
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<MovieSource> movieRepository(MovieRepositoryRef ref) 
async {
  final databaseFuture = ref.watch(driftDatabaseProvider.future);
  final serviceFuture = ref.watch(networkMovieSourceProvider.future);
  return MovieRepository(
      await serviceFuture, await databaseFuture);
}
9. Then change movieViewModel to:
  final repositoryFuture = ref.watch(movieRepositoryProvider.future);
  final model = MovieViewModel(await repositoryFuture);
  await model.setup();
  return model;
10. Make sure you have all of the required imports.

--- Page 556 ---
11. Then type:
dart run build_runner build.
Movie listing
One area that we have not finished is the More link on the home page. We
want to bring up a new screen that shows the full list of trending, now
playing, popular, or top-rated movies. It would also be nice if the listing
would only load one page at a time so that we have an infinite (or at least
how many movies exist) list of movies. We will use a package that will help
in managing the pages and scrolling. Open up home_screen.dart, and
you can see that the onMoreClicked method is empty. Start by creating
the movie listing page:
1. Create a new folder in ui/screens named movie_listing.
2. Create a new file named movie_listing.dart.
3. Add the MovieListing class:
import 'package:auto_route/auto_route.dart';
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 
‘package:infinite_scroll_pagination/infinite_scroll_pagination.dart’;
import 'package:movies/data/models/models.dart';
import 'package:movies/providers.dart';
import 'package:movies/router/app_routes.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/widgets/movie_widget.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/theme/theme.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/widgets/movie_row.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/widgets/not_ready.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/movie_viewmodel.dart';
const pageCount = 20;
const movieRowHeight = 140;
@RoutePage(name: 'MovieListingRoute')
class MovieListing extends ConsumerStatefulWidget {

--- Page 557 ---
  final MovieType movieType;
  const MovieListing(this.movieType, {super.key});
  @override
  ConsumerState<MovieListing> createState() => 
_MovieListingState();
}
class _MovieListingState extends ConsumerState<MovieListing> {
}
4. Add the needed fields:
  late MovieViewModel movieViewModel;
  bool loading = false;
  int totalPagesAvailable = 0;
  int totalMoviesAvailable = 0;
  int currentPage = 1;
  MovieResponse? currentMovieResponse;
  final PagingController<int, MovieResults> _pagingController =
      PagingController(firstPageKey: 0);
We will use the view model to get the movies. The other variables are
for keeping track of how many pages and movies are available. Also,
we need to keep track of the last page we loaded. The paging controller
is from the infinite_scroll_pagination package. This is a
great package for helping load and keep track of what we have
downloaded.
5. Add the initState method:
  @override
  void initState() {
    super.initState();
    _pagingController.addPageRequestListener((pageKey) {
      loadMovies();

--- Page 558 ---
    });
  }
This will add a listener to the controller that will call our
loadMovies method.
6. Add the build method:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    final movieViewModelAsync = 
ref.watch(movieViewModelProvider);
    return movieViewModelAsync.when(
      error: (e, st) => Text(e.toString()),
      loading: () => const NotReady(),
      data: (viewModel) {
        movieViewModel = viewModel;
        return buildScreen();
      },
    );
  }
This method just waits for the view model to load and then calls
buildScreen.
7. Add the buildScreen method:
  Widget buildScreen() {
    return SafeArea(
// 1
      child: FutureBuilder(
        future: loadMovies(),
        builder: (context, snapshot) {
          if (snapshot.connectionState != ConnectionState.done) {

--- Page 559 ---
            return const Center(child: CircularProgressIndicator());
          }
          return Scaffold(
            appBar: AppBar(
              backgroundColor: screenBackground,
              leading: BackButton(
                color: Colors.white,
                onPressed: () {
                  context.router.maybePopTop();
                },
              ),
              centerTitle: false,
              title: Text('Back', style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.headlineMedium),
            ),
            body: Container(
              color: screenBackground,
              child: Column(
                mainAxisSize: MainAxisSize.min,
                mainAxisAlignment: MainAxisAlignment.start,
                crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                children: [
                  Padding(
                    padding: const EdgeInsets.fromLTRB(16, 16.0, 0.0, 24.0),
                    child: Text(getTitle(), style: 
Theme.of(context).textTheme.titleLarge),
                  ),
                  const Divider(),
                  Expanded(
// 2
                    child: PagedListView<int, MovieResults>(
                      pagingController: _pagingController,

--- Page 560 ---
                      builderDelegate: 
PagedChildBuilderDelegate<MovieResults>(
// 3
                        itemBuilder: (context, item, index) => MovieRow(
                            movie: item,
                            movieViewModel: movieViewModel,
                            onMovieTap: (movie) {
                              context.router
                                  .push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: item.id));
                            },
                        ),
                      ),
                    ),
                  ),
                ],
              ),
            ),
          );
        },
      ),
    );
  }
This has some of the basic elements of the screen and then uses a
PagedListView with our paging controller and a movie row being
returned:
a. Use a FutureBuilder to load the current page of movies.
b. The PagedListView is from the
infinite_scroll_pagination package.
c. The itemBuilder just returns a MovieRow.
8. Add the getTitle and onMovieTap methods:
  String getTitle() {

--- Page 561 ---
    switch (widget.movieType) {
      case MovieType.trending:
        return 'Trending';
      case MovieType.popular:
        return 'Popular';
      case MovieType.topRated:
        return 'Top Rated';
      case MovieType.nowPlaying:
        return 'Now Playing';
    }
  }
  void onMovieTap(int movieId) {
    context.router.push(MovieDetailRoute(movieId: movieId));
  }
9. Add the loadMovies method:
  Future loadMovies() async {
    if (loading) {
      return;
    }
    loading = true;
    if (totalPagesAvailable == 0) {
      currentPage = 1;
    }
// 1
    switch (widget.movieType) {
      case MovieType.trending:
        currentMovieResponse =
            await movieViewModel.getTrendingMovies(currentPage);

--- Page 562 ---
      case MovieType.popular:
        currentMovieResponse = await 
movieViewModel.getPopular(currentPage);
      case MovieType.topRated:
        currentMovieResponse = await 
movieViewModel.getTopRated(currentPage);
      case MovieType.nowPlaying:
        currentMovieResponse = await 
movieViewModel.getNowPlaying(currentPage);
    }
    if (currentMovieResponse != null) {
// 2
      totalPagesAvailable = currentMovieResponse!.totalPages;
      totalMoviesAvailable = currentMovieResponse!.totalResults;
      currentPage++;
// 3
      final isLastPage =
          (_pagingController.itemList?.length ?? 0 + pageCount) >=
              totalMoviesAvailable;
// 4
      if (isLastPage) {
        
_pagingController.appendLastPage(currentMovieResponse!.results);
      } else {
// 5
        _pagingController.appendPage(
            currentMovieResponse!.results, currentPage);
      }
    }
    loading = false;
  }
This method does the following:

--- Page 563 ---
a. Call the proper method from the view model based on the movie
type.
b. Gets the total pages and total results.
c. Check if we are on the last page.
d. If we are on the last page, append it to the end of the list.
e. Otherwise, append the page of results.
10. In the terminal, type:
 dart run build_runner build.
Now, we need to update the HomeScreen class to call this class.
11. Open home_screen.dart.
12. Change the SingleChildScrollView to a
CustomScrollView:
          return CustomScrollView(slivers: [
            SliverFillRemaining(
              hasScrollBody: false,
13. Fix the ending parenthesis.
14. Change the call to HomeScreenImage:
                    HomeScreenImage(
                      movieViewModel: movieViewModel,
                      onMovieTap: onMovieTap,
                    ),
15. In the first TitleRow's onMoreClicked add:
                        context.router.push(
                            MovieListingRoute(movieType: MovieType.trending));
16. Add the other routes. For popular:
                        context.router.push(
                            MovieListingRoute(movieType: MovieType.popular));
17. Top rated:

--- Page 564 ---
                        context.router.push(
                            MovieListingRoute(movieType: MovieType.topRated));
18. Open app_routes.dart and add the movie listing route at the
end:
        CustomRoute(
          page: MovieListingRoute.page,
          maintainState: false,
          transitionsBuilder: TransitionsBuilders.fadeIn,
          durationInMilliseconds: 500,
        ),
Do a hot restart and click on the More link. You should see something as
follows:

--- Page 565 ---
Figure 14.1: Movie listing page
Try scrolling and make sure you can see multiple pages of movies.
Depending on your internet connection, it should be pretty smooth.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned how to handle user input. There are many ways
to capture a user's input, from buttons to text fields. The most important
widget to remember is the GestureDetector. This makes any widget
clickable. Focus management is an important area to understand and is key
to making it easier to traverse your app. You also learned about repositories

--- Page 566 ---
and how to separate your code to make it easier to switch components.
Finally, you implemented infinite scrolling and paging API calls.
In the next chapter, you will learn all about Firebase, including its NoSQL
database, authentication, and cloud messaging. This is an easy-to-setup and
use server. You will learn how to set up Firebase, install the Firebase
packages, and implement Firebase database calls.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 567 ---
CHAPTER 15
Firebase
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about many of the services that Firebase
provides. You will learn how to sign up for Firebase and create a Cloud
Firestore database. You will also learn how to retrieve and save data in
Firestore. There are many services that Firebase provides, and you will learn
about a few of the most important ones. Now that your movie app is taking
shape and getting ready for release, you will learn how to track crashes in
your app with Crashlytics. You will switch your database from Drift to
Firebase with just a change to a Riverpod provider.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Introduction to Firebase
• Authentication
• Cloud Firestore
• Collections
• Reading and writing data
• Crashlytics
• Other services

--- Page 568 ---
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have learned about several Firebase
services. You will be able to investigate the services that we do not cover in
detail in this chapter. You will learn how to set up Firebase and Cloud
Firestore and you will learn about Collections and documents that make up
the database. Finally, you will have learned how to set up Crashlytics to start
tracking crashes in the movie app.
Introduction to Firebase
Firebase is a set of online services that Google bought in 2014 and has been
adding to ever since. Their first product was the Firebase Realtime Database,
which synchronizes data between iOS, Android, and web devices. They then
launched Firebase Hosting and Authentication. This positioned the company
as a mobile backend service. In 2016, they launched Firebase Analytics, and
then in 2017, they acquired Crashlytics. In the same year, they launched
Cloud Firestore, a real-time document database. Cloud Firestore is more
powerful than Realtime Database and can handle larger datasets. Many
developers use Firebase to save data, handle notifications to mobile devices,
handle crashes, distribute apps, and remotely configure their devices.
Firebase is easy to set up and start using. Crashlytics has been a staple for
dealing with crashes. It is a great tool to monitor any crashes your users are
encountering, and plan fixes around them. It will show how many users are
experiencing each crash and the stack trace for each one so you can figure
out what is causing the crash. Google is also advertising its generative AI
ability with Firebase. There are more features than can be described in this
chapter. It is recommended to go to https://firebase.google.com/ to read
more. In this chapter, we will be working with the Cloud Firestore database
and replacing drift with Firestore.
Note: Google also provides Firestore Cloud SQL, which is a relational database.
Setting up Firebase
In Chapter 13, Web and Desktop, you worked with Firebase to host your app
as a web page. If you want to create a new project with Firebase, perform the
following:

--- Page 569 ---
1. Go to https://console.firebase.google.com/ and log in.
2. Create a new Firebase project:
Figure 15.1: New project
3. Create a project:

--- Page 570 ---
Figure 15.2: Name project
4. Enable/disable analytics:

--- Page 571 ---
Figure 15.3: Analytics
5. Press Create project:
Figure 15.4: Preparing
6. Press Continue:

--- Page 572 ---
Figure 15.5: Project created
7. The project has been created:
Figure 15.6: Add apps
Firebase has some command line tools that make it easy to add Firebase to
your app. You can find a full description here:
https://firebase.google.com/docs/flutter/setup?platform=android. The
first step is to install the Firebase CLI tool:
1. Go to https://firebase.google.com/docs/cli-setup_update_cli.
2. Follow the procedures for your OS.

--- Page 573 ---
3. For macOS, type the following in a terminal:
curl -sL https://firebase.tools | bash
4. To login to Firebase, in a terminal type:
firebase login
5. Install Firebase Dart tool:
dart pub global activate flutterfire_cli
6. Configure Firebase, adding all platforms:
flutterfire configure
Figure 15.7: flutterfire configure
7. In your project's folder, add the Firebase packages:
flutter pub add firebase_core
flutter pub add cloud_firestore
flutter pub add firebase_auth
flutter pub add google_sign_in
This adds the core Firebase library, Firestore, Firebase Auth, and Google
sign in.
8. For iOS, you may need to go into the iOS directory and type:
pod install
This will update the iOS libraries. You may also get some errors that
will require you to open the project in Xcode to update the target
configuration.
9. Inside of main.dart, add the following imports:
import 'package:firebase_core/firebase_core.dart';

--- Page 574 ---
import 'firebase_options.dart';
10. Add the following after putLumberdashToWork:
await Firebase.initializeApp(
  options: DefaultFirebaseOptions.currentPlatform,
);
Stop and re-run your app to make sure everything still works.
Authentication
Firebase provides authentication. If you have an app that requires different
data for different users, you will want a way to create user accounts, allow
the user to sign in, and retrieve data just for that user. While the movie app
uses the same data for each user and does not require a login, we will create
a sample function for signing in with the Google sign-in package. The steps
are as follows:
1. In the data/database folder, create a new folder named
firebase.
2. Create a new file: firebase_auth.dart.
3. Add the following:
import 'package:firebase_auth/firebase_auth.dart';
import 'package:google_sign_in/google_sign_in.dart';
Future<UserCredential> signInWithGoogle() async {
  // Trigger the authentication flow
  final googleUser = await GoogleSignIn().signIn();
  // Obtain the auth details from the request
  final googleAuth = await googleUser?.authentication;
  // Create a new credential
  final credential = GoogleAuthProvider.credential(
    accessToken: googleAuth?.accessToken,
    idToken: googleAuth?.idToken,
  );
  // Once signed in, return the UserCredential
  return FirebaseAuth.instance.signInWithCredential(credential);

--- Page 575 ---
}
This function starts the process of launching a sign-in screen for Google
accounts. Once the user signs in, you will get a Google user. For a real
app, you would need to do some error handling and check that a user
was returned. We then use the return authentication to get a credential
and sign in with that credential. You would want to save the user
credential to get a User class. This User class has a display name,
email, and user ID.
4. Open firebase_options.dart in the lib folder.
5. For iOS, copy the iosClientId value.
6. For iOS, open the info.plist file in the ios/Runner directory.
7. Find the following:
<key>CFBundleURLSchemes</key>
<array>
8. Add:
<string><reverse the copied iosClientID></string>
For example, the client id is:
750270443672-
6euf75e6k3vi979qqrop37fq78omk3jt.apps.googleusercontent.com
My string is:
<string>com.googleusercontent.apps.750270443672-
6euf75e6k3vi979qqrop37fq78omk3jt</string>
9. Find a place to put a call to the sign in. To test, put it in the call for the
rate button as it does not have any functionality at this point (and this is
just for testing):
            icon: IconButton(
              onPressed: () {
                signInWithGoogle();
              },
10. Run your app on iOS and test sign in. It should take you to a Google

--- Page 576 ---
sign in.
Cloud Firestore
Cloud Firestore is Google's newest NoSQL document database. NoSQL is a
non-relational database that does not rely on tables. There is nothing in the
database that defines how the data should be stored. Data is stored first in
collections and then in documents and usually contain JSON data. These
documents have unique IDs. You can nest documents as far as you want but
that can complicate data retrieval and storage. NoSQL can be useful for large
data sets, real-time applications (like chat, games, etc.), or other types.
Realtime Database was the first version, and while they are both NoSQL
databases, they have a few differences:
• Realtime database:
o Stores data as a single JSON tree.
o Queries retrieve the entire subtree.
o Optimized for real-time synchronization and low latency.
o Optimized for smaller datasets.
• Cloud Firestore:
o Stores data in documents, organized into collections
o More powerful and flexible queries.
o Better for larger datasets.
Both provide offline support with local caching and use a rule-based system
to secure data. Realtime charges are based on bandwidth and storage, while
Firestore charges are based mostly on read/write operations and less on
bandwidth and storage.
To get an instance of Firestore, you would call:
  final firebase = FirebaseFirestore.instance;
To initialize Firebase, you would use:
    FirebaseApp firebaseApp = await Firebase.initializeApp(
      options: DefaultFirebaseOptions.currentPlatform,

--- Page 577 ---
    );
Collections
For Firestore, collections are containers for documents. The way this works
is you would create a collection with a given name. You can do this both
from the console or from code. For example, the movie app will have a
collection named Favorites. This will store all the favorites that a user would
make. You can then have documents inside of that collection. How you store
those documents is crucial to how easy it is to retrieve them. If you just add
a document without an ID, Firestore will assign a unique ID for you. This
might look something like 4Kc59lp62s74BGJtAxlE. Inside of that document
is the JSON data for that favorite. For our app, we will be storing favorites
with no user-identifying information. If you want the app to be useable by
multiple users, you would either embed a user ID in the record or have a
sub-collection for that user. Designing the layout of your collections is
important for loading and saving data speed. Storing your data in a deep
layout will make retrieval quicker but make your code more complex while
making your collection structure shallow would require you to load more
data than you would probably need. You can also nest collections. For
example, you can have a collection that then has a list of documents that are
user IDs; those can then have sub-collections with documents. This will
make your code more complex, so you must decide how you want to
structure your data. It is recommended to do tests with different collection
layouts to see the performance difference and what it would take to
implement. One important thing to note about NoSQL databases is that you
do not have JOIN operations that you would have in a typical SQL database.
This means you cannot query multiple tables with linked fields at once. This
means you will probably have to duplicate information in different
documents and keep that information synced. This is not trivial and should
be considered when deciding on using a NoSQL database.
To create a collection in code, you would call:
  final favoritesCollection = FirebaseFirestore.instance.collection('favorites');
This gets an instance of Firebase Firestore and creates a collection object
with the name favorites.

--- Page 578 ---
Reading and writing data
To read data, you would use the collections get method. This returns to a
QuerySnapshot class. From this class, you can get a list of documents
and create classes from each document's data. For example, to get a list of
favorites:
    final favorites = <DBFavorite>[];
    final querySnapshot = await favoritesCollection.get();
    for (final doc in querySnapshot.docs) {
      var favorite = DBFavorite.fromJson(doc.data());
      favorite = favorite.copyWith(id: int.tryParse(doc.id) ?? 0);
      favorites.add(favorite);
    }
This waits for the collection's get call to finish and then iterates through each
doc to get a new favorite. Writing data is even easier:
    final ref = await favoritesCollection.add(favorite.toJson());
    return Future.value(ref.id);
This just adds the JSON to the collection. The result is a
DocumentReference, which has an ID and a few methods for dealing
with the document.
To remove a favorite, you would need to get the specific favorite document
and then delete it. This is a bit tricky. This is an example of searching for a
favorite with a given ID:
    final ref = await favoritesCollection.where('id', isEqualTo: id).get();
    if (ref.docs.isNotEmpty) {
      ref.docs[0].reference.delete();
    }
Here, we search the collection for a document with the given ID and then get
it. If it exists, we get the first document and delete it. A where statement can

--- Page 579 ---
return multiple documents, but in our case, we are searching for a unique ID.
Firebase database
To create our Firebase database class, perform the following:
1. Create a new file named firebase_database.dart in the
firebase directory.
2. Add the class definition:
import 'package:cloud_firestore/cloud_firestore.dart';
import 'package:firebase_core/firebase_core.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/drift/database_interface.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/configuration.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/favorite.dart';
import 'package:movies/data/database/models/genre.dart';
import 'package:movies/firebase_options.dart';
const favorites = 'favorites';
const genres = 'genres';
const configuration = 'configuration';
const images = 'images';
class FirebaseDatabase implements IDatabase {
}
Besides the imports, we define some constants for our collection names.
3. Add the variables:
  static late FirebaseApp firebaseApp;
  final firebase = FirebaseFirestore.instance;
  final favoritesCollection = 
FirebaseFirestore.instance.collection(favorites);
  final genresCollection = FirebaseFirestore.instance.collection(genres);

--- Page 580 ---
  final configurationCollection =
      FirebaseFirestore.instance.collection(configuration);
  final imagesCollection = FirebaseFirestore.instance.collection(images);
This gets an instance of the FirebaseFirestore class and creates
collection references.
4. Initialize Firestore:
  static Future initialize() async {
    firebaseApp = await Firebase.initializeApp(
      options: DefaultFirebaseOptions.currentPlatform,
    );
  }
This needs to be called before Firestore can be used and will be
initialized in the Riverpod providers file.
5. Override the deleteDatabase method. This will not do anything:
  @override
  Future deleteDatabase() {
    return Future.value(null);
  }
You would normally not want to delete a server database from the code.
If you need to delete the database, you can go to the Firebase console.
6. Get the list of favorites:
  @override
  Future<List<DBFavorite>> getFavorites() async {
    final favorites = <DBFavorite>[];
    final querySnapshot = await favoritesCollection.get();
    for (final doc in querySnapshot.docs) {
      var favorite = DBFavorite.fromJson(doc.data());

--- Page 581 ---
      favorite = favorite.copyWith(id: int.tryParse(doc.id) ?? 0);
      favorites.add(favorite);
    }
    return favorites;
  }
This is just like the sample above.
7. Stream Favorites:
  @override
  Stream<List<DBFavorite>> streamFavorites() {
    return favoritesCollection
        .snapshots()
        .map((snapShot) => snapShot.docs
            .map((doc) => DBFavorite.fromJson(doc.data()))
            .toList())
        .asBroadcastStream();
  }
Firestore can also stream collections. The snapshots call returns a
stream of QuerySnapshots that we map to our favorite class.
8. Remove a favorite:
  @override
  Future<bool> removeFavorite(int id) async {
    final ref = await favoritesCollection.where('id', isEqualTo: id).get();
    if (ref.docs.isNotEmpty) {
      ref.docs[0].reference.delete();
    }
    return Future.value(true);

--- Page 582 ---
  }
Just like the example we gave above.
9. Save a favorite:
  @override
  Future saveFavorite(DBFavorite favorite) async {
    final ref = await favoritesCollection.add(favorite.toJson());
    return Future.value(ref.id);
  }
10. Get all genres:
  @override
  Future<List<DBMovieGenre>> getGenres() async {
    final genres = <DBMovieGenre>[];
    final querySnapshot = await genresCollection.get();
    for (final doc in querySnapshot.docs) {
      var genre = DBMovieGenre.fromJson(doc.data());
      genre = genre.copyWith(id: int.tryParse(doc.id) ?? 0);
      genres.add(genre);
    }
    return genres;
  }
11. Save a list of genres:
  @override
  Future saveGenres(List<DBMovieGenre> genres) {
    for (final genre in genres) {
      genresCollection.add(genre.toJson());
    }

--- Page 583 ---
    return Future.value(null);
  }
12. Get the Movie configuration:
  @override
  Future<DBConfiguration?> getMovieConfiguration() async {
    final querySnapshot = await configurationCollection.get();
    for (final doc in querySnapshot.docs) {
      var configuration = DBConfiguration.fromJson(doc.data());
      configuration = configuration.copyWith(id: int.tryParse(doc.id) ?? 
0);
      final imagesSnapshot = await imagesCollection.get();
      if (imagesSnapshot.docs.isNotEmpty) {
        final images =
            
DBConfigurationImages.fromJson(imagesSnapshot.docs[0].data());
        configuration = configuration.copyWith(images: images);
      }
      return configuration;
    }
    return Future.value(null);
  }
13. Get a movie configuration by ID:
  @override
  Future<DBConfiguration?> getMovieConfigurationById(int id) async 
{
    final docRef = await configurationCollection.doc(id.toString()).get();
    final data = docRef.data();

--- Page 584 ---
    if (data != null) {
      return DBConfiguration.fromJson(data);
    }
    return null;
  }
14. Save a movie configuration:
  @override
  Future saveMovieConfiguration(DBConfiguration configuration) {
    final configJson = configuration.toJson();
    print(configJson);
    configurationCollection.add(configJson);
    return Future.value(null);
  }
Firebase provider
For this chapter, we are going to switch from using the drift database to
Firebase. To do that we will create a new provider for Firebase and use that
in place of drift. Since they both implement the IDatabase interface, we
can swap them. Next, add the Firebase provider to the providers file:
1. Open up providers.dart.
2. Add the Firebase provider:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
IDatabase firebase(FirebaseRef ref) => FirebaseDatabase();
3. Add a database provider that we can use to switch between the two
databases:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<IDatabase> database(DatabaseRef ref) {
  // Change this to what we want to use

--- Page 585 ---
  return Future.value(ref.watch(firebaseProvider));
}
4. Modify the movieViewModel to:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<MovieSource> movieRepository(MovieRepositoryRef ref) 
async {
  final database = await ref.watch(databaseProvider.future);
  final serviceFuture = ref.watch(networkMovieSourceProvider.future);
  return MovieRepository(
      await serviceFuture, database);
}
With the addition of Firebase, we will need to make a few changes.
Firebase requires a minimum Android SDK value of 23.
5. Open android/app/build.gradle.
6. Change the minSdkVersion to:
minSdkVersion 23
Finally, we need to use a special file for improving our JSON
serialization.
7. In the root folder, create a new file named build.yaml.
8. Add:
targets:
  $default:
    builders:
      json_serializable|json_serializable:
        options:
          explicit_to_json: true
          include_if_null: false

--- Page 586 ---
This will fix the problem of the DBConfiguration images not fully
being serialized.
9. In the terminal, run the following:
dart run build_runner build
Stop and restart your app to make sure everything works. Try saving
some favorites and check your Firebase console. You should see
something like this:
Figure 15.8: Favorites
This shows the configuration, favorites, and genre collections. The favorites
collection is selected and there are three documents. Each document has a
favorite JSON.
Crashlytics
Crashlytics is Firebase's real-time crash and error reporting system. This is a
great way to keep track of how your app is doing and fix crashes before they
get out of control. Crashlytics has a dashboard where you can view all of
your crashes and stack traces. To add Crashlytics to the movie app, follow
these steps:
1. Add Crashlytics. In a terminal type:
flutter pub add firebase_crashlytics
2. Configure Crashlytics:

--- Page 587 ---
flutterfire configure
3. In main.dart add the following after
Firebase.initializeApp:
  FlutterError.onError = (errorDetails) {
    FirebaseCrashlytics.instance.recordFlutterFatalError(errorDetails);
  };
  // Pass all uncaught asynchronous errors that aren't handled by the 
Flutter framework to Crashlytics
  PlatformDispatcher.instance.onError = (error, stack) {
    FirebaseCrashlytics.instance.recordError(error, stack, fatal: true);
    return true;
  };
This will catch both regular and asynchronous errors. To finish the
setup, you will need to cause a crash. Let us reuse the Rate icon we
used.
4. Change the onPressed for the rate icon in button_row.dart to:
                throw Exception();
5. Run the app and click on the Rate button.
6. Go to the Crashlytics tab in the Firebase console. You should see the
following:

--- Page 588 ---
Figure 15.9: Crashlytics
Note: iOS may have issues running. You may have to delete the Crashlytics build script in
Xcode in the Build Phases section.
Other services
Firebase has more services than we can cover in this chapter. Some of the
notable services include:
• Cloud messaging: Provides a connection from your server to all devices
to send notifications.
• Remote config: Allows you to dynamically personalize an app and
provide experiments. You set up variables that your app checks for. You
can provide different UIs or features based on those settings.
• App distribution: Used for managing pre-release versions of your apps
to testers.
• App hosting: Used to host web apps. Can be used for Flutter web apps.
• A/B testing: Used for experiments. Allows you to analyze results.
• Analytics: A way to analyze events from your app.
• Test lab: A cloud-based app testing service run on real devices.
• Performance monitoring: Measure network requests, screen rendering,
and other performance-related tasks.

--- Page 589 ---
• Generative AI integration: Integrate with Google’s Gemini and other
AI technologies.
All of this adds up to a powerful set of tools that will help you in your
journey to developing your application.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about a lot of the services that Firebase provides.
Many of these services are free or free for a certain amount of usage. You
learned how to set up Firebase and, specifically, Firebase Cloud Firestore.
You know how to retrieve and save data in Firestore as well as how this
information is stored: collections and documents. You can also keep track of
any crashes, thanks to Crashlytics.
In the next chapter, you will learn more about packages and how to create
your own. Packages form the backbone of many apps, and having the ability
to break your app up into multiple packages will make your build faster and
allow it to be worked on by multiple teams.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 590 ---
CHAPTER 16
Packages
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn all about packages and how to create one. You
will also learn how to fix any errors that come with refactoring a project with
a package. Share your projects with the Flutter community by publishing
your very own package. You will also learn about the importance of being a
verified publisher. These skills will help you reuse your code for other
projects as well as sharing with others. While you will use other packages,
there is great satisfaction in helping others with the knowledge you have
learned by writing packages that can be shared with others.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Introduction to packages
• Creating a package
• Refactoring code to package
• Publishing a package
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have learned all about packages and how
to create a new one. You will learn how to register to become a verified

--- Page 591 ---
publisher and how to publish a package. You will have a good understanding
of what a package is and some of the benefits of using your own package.
Introduction to packages
Packages are collections of Dart code put into their own project. Think of it
as a mini-Flutter project. The project does not have to be Flutter related but
can be just Dart code. Packages can also include assets and will have a
pubspec.yaml file, just like a Flutter project. This pubspec.yaml does the
same thing as in a Flutter project. The difference between a package and a
plugin is that a package does not contain native code, just Dart. The most
common place to store packages is at Google’s pub.dev site. While you can
publish to other sites, most people expect packages to be at pub.dev. Each
package on the site has a score that developers can use to judge the quality
of the package. People can like a package, but pub.dev also auto-generates a
popularity value (measured as the number of apps that depend on this
package over the last 60 days) and pub points, which are a combination of:
• Following Dart file conventions, up to 30 points.
• Provides documentation, up to 20 points.
• Platform support (how many platforms), up to 20 points.
• Pass static analysis, up to 50 points. Errors will count against.
• Up-to-date dependencies, up to 20 points.
To add a local package to your project (and not one from pub.dev), you
would give the package a name and a path. For example:
  my_package:
    path: ../my_package
Remember that when we added the menubar package, we used git settings.
Those were as follows:
  menubar:
    git:
      url: https://github.com/google/flutter-desktop-embedding
      path: plugins/menubar

--- Page 592 ---
      ref: 12decbe0f592e14e03223f6f2c0c7e0e2dbd70a1
Here, the URL is the path to GitHub, the path is the sub-project, and the ref
is the git commit hash. As you can see, there are several ways to import a
package. We will use the local package method for our new package.
Creating a package
We are going to create our own package by moving all of the database and
networking code to its own package. This will isolate the code so that other
team members can work on just that portion of the project to improve or
make changes to it. You could also create a package if you felt your code
would be useful to others. For example, I created a package to make it easier
to use the Supabase Postgres database. Initially, I had it as part of one
project and then realized that I needed that same code for other projects. By
creating it in its own package, and eventually publishing it, I was able to
make changes in one place, and all projects would get those updates. Of
course, updating a package requires updating the version number in the
pubspec.yaml file.
To create a project, you can use your IDE or create one from the command
line. To create a new package from the command line, you would use the
flutter create command as follows:
flutter create --template=package  --org=<org> --project-name=<project 
name> <directory name>
Movie data project
To create our package, do the following:
1. Go to the Terminal app.
2. Go to the directory above your current directory.
3. Type the following:
flutter create --template=package  --org=com.bpb.movies --project-
name=movie_data movie_data 
This will create a new folder named movie_data with a new package. If you
look at the generated files, they look pretty similar. The packages have:
• A lib directory for source files.

--- Page 593 ---
• A test directory for test files.
• A pubspec.yaml file for other packages.
What it does not have are the platform directories:
• android
• ios
• windows
• macos
• linux
• web
One of the files created from this process is the README.md file. This is
an important file that is shown as the main page when you publish your
package. The other two files that are generated for you are:
• ChangeLog.md: Lists changes for each version.
• LICENSE file: What type of license this project is under.
Example app
In addition to the package documentation in the README file, it is really
helpful to create an example project. This example project will be inside of
the package at the root level. This will be an application, and when created,
it will have the typical counter app. It is recommended to replace this with a
sample app that demonstrates how to use your package. In our case, you
might have different screens that make calls into the movie API or database
calls so that the user can see how your code is called.
To create the example app, go to the terminal and perform the following:
1. Create the example directory.
mkdir example
2. Go into the example directory.
cd example
3. Create a new project.
Flutter create .

--- Page 594 ---
Take a look at the generated project. It looks like a normal Flutter app and
has the android, ios, linux, macos, web, and windows directories. Inside
the lib folder is one main.dart file. You can delete all the code here and
create or own and even create other files. Sometimes, copying files from
your main project will help create this sample app.
Refactoring code to package
What we want to do is move all of the files in the data and network folders
to these new packages. The steps are as follows:
1. Open the movie_data project.
2. Inside of the lib directory create a new src directory.
Note that packages use a src directory instead of being directly inside of the lib directory.
These files are hidden unless you export them via the movie_data.dart file.
3. From the Finder, File Explorer, or other file system app, move the data
and network directories to the src directory in the new package. (You
can do this in some IDEs, but it might be harder)
4. Move the following packages from the movies project’s pubspec.yaml
to the movie_data project’s pubspec.yaml file:
  json_annotation: ^4.8.1
  freezed_annotation: ^2.4.1
  dio: ^5.4.3+1
  drift: ^2.20.2
  drift_flutter: ^0.2.0
  sqlite3_flutter_libs: ^0.5.24
  cloud_firestore: ^5.4.4
  firebase_auth: ^5.3.1
  google_sign_in: ^6.2.1
Add the following dependencies:
  intl: ^0.18.1
  lumberdash: ^3.0.0

--- Page 595 ---
  firebase_core: ^3.6.0
Move the following dev_dependencies:
  json_serializable: ^6.7.1
  freezed: ^2.4.7
  drift_dev: ^2.20.3
Add these dev_dependencies:
  build_runner: ^2.4.8
5. Do a global replace in movie_data to replace ‘package:movies’ to
‘package:movie_data/src’. Most IDE’s have a global find and replace
function.
6. Delete the test/movie_data_test.dart file.
7. Move the file database_interface.dart in the data/database/drift
folder to the database folder.
8. Fix any incorrect imports to database_interface.
9. Open firebase_database.dart. We need to make a few changes.
10. Remove the firebase_options.dart import.
11. Add a new field below imagesCollection, add a constructor, and
change the initialize method.
  final FirebaseOptions options;
  FirebaseDatabase(this.options);
12. Remove the initialize method.
13. Open movie_api_service.dart.
14. Remove the two imports that do not exist.
15. Change the constructor and init method to:
  MovieAPIService(this.apiKey);
  Future init() async {
    configureDio();
  }
16. Remove the webload method.
Notice the movie_data.dart file. This is the entry point for projects
using your package.

--- Page 596 ---
17. Open movie_data.dart. This is the barrel file for the package (a barrel
file is simply a list of dart files you export).
18. Remove the generated calculator method.
19. Add the following exports so that users of the package will see the
files:
library movie_data;
export 'src/data/models/models.dart';
export 'src/data/database/models/database_models.dart';
export 'src/data/database/firebase/firebase_database.dart';
export 'src/data/database/firebase/firebase_auth.dart';
export 'src/data/database/drift/drift_database.dart';
export 'src/data/repository/movie_repository.dart';
export 'src/data/sources/database_source.dart';
export 'src/data/sources/movie_source.dart';
export 'src/data/sources/network_movie_source.dart';
export 'src/network/movie_api_service.dart';
export 'src/data/database/database_interface.dart';
The model files have all of the models in them.
20. Open src/data/models/models.dart.
21. Add a missing export:
export 'genre_state.dart';
22. Copy the build.yaml file over.
23. In the terminal, type:
 dart run build_runner build. 
To make sure the build system works probably.
Movies project
Now, we need to update the main project.
1. Open pubspec.yaml.
2. Remove the following packages, if you have not already.
  json_annotation: ^4.8.1

--- Page 597 ---
  freezed_annotation: ^2.4.1
  dio: ^5.4.3+1
  drift: ^2.20.2
  drift_flutter: ^0.2.0
  sqlite3_flutter_libs: ^0.5.24
  cloud_firestore: ^5.4.4
  firebase_auth: ^5.3.1
  google_sign_in: ^6.2.1
dev_dependencies:
  drift_dev: ^2.20.3
    json_serializable: ^6.7.1
    freezed: ^2.4.7
3. Add the movies_data package:
  movie_data:
    path: ../movie_data
4. Do a Pub Get.
5. Find all files with the old imports and places with errors and replace
them with:
import 'package:movie_data/movie_data.dart';
6. Open providers.dart and remove the incorrect imports.
7. Change the movieAPIService call to (and add needed imports):
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<MovieAPIService> movieAPIService(MovieAPIServiceRef ref) 
async {
  String apiKey;
  if (!isWeb()) {
    apiKey = dotenv.env['TMDB_KEY']!;
  } else {
    apiKey = await webLoad();

--- Page 598 ---
  }
  final service = MovieAPIService(apiKey);
  await service.init();
  return service;
}
Future<String> webLoad() async {
  String apiKey = '';
  try {
    final dotEnvString = await rootBundle.loadString('dotenv');
    if (dotEnvString.contains('TMDB_KEY')) {
      final parts = dotEnvString.split('=');
      if (parts.length == 2) {
        apiKey = parts[1];
        if (apiKey.contains("'")) {
          apiKey = apiKey.replaceAll("'", "");
        }
      }
    } else {
      apiKey = dotEnvString;
    }
  } catch (e) {
    print(e);
  }
  return apiKey;
}
8. Change the database, and Firebase calls to:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Future<IDatabase> database(DatabaseRef ref) {
  // Change this to what we want to use
  final firebaseFuture = ref.watch(firebaseProvider.future);
  return firebaseFuture;
}
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)

--- Page 599 ---
Future<IDatabase> firebase(FirebaseRef ref) async {
  return FirebaseDatabase(DefaultFirebaseOptions.currentPlatform);
}
9. In the terminal, type:
 dart run build_runner build. 
10. To fix a few problems with iOS overflow and the top system, open
ui/theme/theme.dart. Add the following to the ThemeData:
    scaffoldBackgroundColor: Colors.black,
11. In main_screen.dart, remove the SizedBox around the
BottomNavigationBar.
Try running the app now to make sure that it works. Test both Android and
iOS platforms.
Publishing a package
If you would like to share your package with others, then pub.dev is the
place where other developers can find it. pub.dev has the ability to easily
search for packages that are sorted by relevance and popularity. To get
popular, you need to have good documentation and make your package easy
to use. To publish a package, there are a few things that are required for a
package. The most important file is the pubspec.yaml. This will describe the
package. In order for the user on pub.dev to know what your package is all
about; they would read what you put into the Readme.md file. This is a
markdown file and should be formatted using the markdown language. One
site for documentation on markdown is https://www.markdownguide.org/.
Without a good Readme, users will not know why to use your package. So, it
is critical that you describe your package, what it does, how to use it, and
maybe even why they should use it. To know what you have done for each
version, you will update the Changelog.md file describing what you have
done in each version. Finally, you need a license that lets the user know how
they can use your package.
pubspec.yaml
You already know about this file, but it is also used by the publishing tool, so
certain fields need to be filled out. Make sure you fill out:

--- Page 600 ---
• name: Name of the package.
• description: A small description of the package.
• version: The current version of the package.
• repository: URL to your repo, usually a GitHub site. (Optional)
• homepage: URL to a homepage for the package. It can also be the
GitHub site. (Optional)
Readme.md
This is your place to describe your package and explain how to use it. Here
is a quick set of markdown characters:
• Use the '#' characters for different header levels. One # is a top level, ##
is the second level, etc.
• Use the triple backtick character for the code. For example:
```dart
Final configuration = Configuration();
```
• Use the '**' character to surround the text to make it bold.
Use a markdown app to view the results before publishing. If you can add
graphics, it would be even better, as that will catch the eyes of readers. If
you are building a widget, show what the widget looks like in its different
variations.
Changelog.md
This file is for commenting on the changes you make for each version. Make
sure you update this file every time you publish a new version. The first
version goes at the bottom, and the newer versions go above that. Here is an
example:
## 1.0.1
* Add Movie Theme
## 1.0.0-dev.1
* First release.

--- Page 601 ---
Make sure you keep the version in the pubspec.yaml synced with the
Changelog file.
License file
To publish a package, you will need a license file. The recommended license
is the BSD 3-clause file. https://opensource.org/license/BSD-3-Clause. If
you need any other type of license, you can find them online. Just put it in
the LICENSE file.
Requirements
There are a few other requirements:
• The package size should be less than 100 MB after compression. You
can split it into multiple packages if needed.
• Included packages should be from pub.dev.
• You will need a Google account to manage permissions.
Verified publisher
Being a verified publisher means that you have your own domain that can be
verified by Google. You can publish your package as an unverified
publisher, but it is not recommended. You will have a higher rating, and
people will trust your package more if you are a verified publisher. It takes a
bit of time, but it is worth it. To become a verified publisher, do the
following:
• Go to pub.dev.
• Log in with your Google account:
Figure 16.1: Pub.dev sign-in
• Select Create publisher:

--- Page 602 ---
Figure 16.2: Create publisher
• Follow the instructions on the next page:
Figure 16.3: Start verification
It takes quite a bit of work after this, as you will have to have access to your
domain settings by setting some DNS-CNAME records. Google will then
verify these settings, and after some time, you will become verified.

--- Page 603 ---
Publishing
To publish, you will use the dart command-line tool. You can find more
information at https://dart.dev/tools/pub/cmd/pub-lish and
https://dart.dev/tools/pub/publishing. The command for publishing is:
dart pub publish  
This has an additional optional parameter of –dry-run. This allows you to
test your publishing before it actually sends it to pub.dev. Once you have
everything ready: from the readme, changelog, license file, and
pubspec.yaml, you can try to publish.
Note: It is critical that you have this in a Git repo as the publish command
uses git to list files.
Note: Some readers may find some of the topics discussed to be overly elementary. However,
we hope that while you read, you will learn some new and useful ideas. The intention is for all
readers to be familiar with these foundations and be able to utilize Wireshark to its full
potential.
To do a dry run for publishing the package, apply the following:
1. In the terminal type:
dart pub publish –dry-run
Trying a dry-run in our package produces:
Figure 16.4: Publish dry run
As you can see, we have a few errors we need to fix. This tells us that
we are missing the path_provider and the path package as it is needed

--- Page 604 ---
for the drift package.
2. Add the two missing packages to pubspec.yaml:
  path_provider: ^2.1.5
  path: ^1.9.0
3. From the command line type:
dart pub publish –-dry-run 
Look through the errors to see if you can fix any issues before you
publish. Also, note that having your package in a path that has spaces in
the name could cause issues as well. If you have files that you do not
want to be published, create a .pubignore file and add those files to that
file. The output from the publish command looks like:
Figure 16.5: Successful publish dry run
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned all about packages and how to create a new
package. You then learned how to fix any errors that come with refactoring a
project with a package. Finally, you learned how to register to become a
verified publisher and how to publish a package.
In the next chapter, you will learn all about platform channels and plugins.
This will help you understand plugins and how you would go about creating
your own package for Android and iOS and accessing native systems.

--- Page 605 ---
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 606 ---
CHAPTER 17
Platform Channels and Plugins
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn about plugins and when you need to use them
or build your own. There are many third-party plugins that provide the
backbone for Flutter’s functionality and should be what you use if you need
native functionality. If that functionality does not exist, you can build your
own. You will learn how plugins work and how to build your own
SharedPreferences type plugin.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Writing a plugin
• Using third-party plugins
• Platform channels
• Building a plugin
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will know when to use third-party plugins
and when to build your own. You will understand how plugins work and
communicate with the Flutter app. You will also understand how to create
and build a plugin that will replace the SharedPreferences plugin.

--- Page 607 ---
Writing a plugin
Unlike a package, which is a library of Dart code, a plugin is a set of native
code with a Dart front-end. Depending on which platforms are supported,
you will have Android, iOS, macOS, Linux, and Windows. When a plugin
is created, there are three main .dart files:
• <plugin name>.dart
• <plugin name>_method_channel.dart
• <plugin name>_platform_interface.dart
These files are the entry point into the plugin. The first file, <plugin
name>.dart, is what the user of the plugin will see. These have all of the
methods that can be called for this plugin. This class will, in turn, call the
platform singleton instance, which will then call the channel class. The
platform class implements the PlatformInterface class, which just has a
constructor that takes a token. This class is itself abstract and is
implemented by the channel class. This is a bit confusing, but it helps to
separate interfaces from classes. The channel class is so named because it
has an instance of a MethodChannel. This class is used to talk to native
code. The way they do this is by sending and receiving messages. You
would make a call as follows:
methodChannel.invokeMethod<Return Type>(String methodName, 
[arguments]);
You define what method names that will be available and then the user calls
a method in the plugin class. Remember that the main plugin name (defined
by how you created the plugin) will contain all of the methods the user of
the plugin will see.
In this chapter, we will be creating a shared preferences plugin. This will
duplicate the current shared preferences but will demonstrate how to create
a plugin and implement it in Android and iOS. We will not be creating any
other platform code, but if you would like to expand on it, you can create
the Windows, macOS, or Linux versions.
Using third-party plugins

--- Page 608 ---
In Android Studio, there is an External Libraries section in the Project view.
If you open up the Flutter Plugins section, you will see all of the plugins we
are currently using in our project:

--- Page 610 ---
Figure 17.1: Movie plugins
As you can see in Figure 17.1, there are a lot of them. When you need
native functionality that Flutter does not provide, then it is highly
recommended that you first search for an existing plugin from pub.dev.
You can do a search and will usually find multiple plugins that do what you
need. The only thing you need to do is determine which plugin is best. Do
this by viewing the plugin’s ratings, documentation, and examples. Before
you fully commit to a plugin, it might be wise to do a test with the plugin to
make sure it handles all of your needs. For example, there are many video
plugins, all with different features. Do you need a plugin that works on
certain platforms? If it does not, you can eliminate that plugin. Does it have
all of the features you need? If not, you can eliminate that one. What
happens if you search all available plugins and nothing matches what you
are looking for? If you find one that is close to what you want, you can fork
that plugin and modify it yourself (assuming it has a license that allows you
to do that). That will give you a head start in building a plugin. I needed a
plugin that worked on iOS and Android and used Bluetooth to connect to a
specific device. Since this was a very specific need, it was decided to write
our own plugin. Luckily, we had native code examples we could use for
this. We had older iOS and Android apps that had this implemented, so we
could copy a lot of the code over.
Platform channels
Platform channels are a way for Flutter apps to communicate with native
code running on a device. They provide a bidirectional communication
channel between Flutter and native code. The idea is for a Flutter app to tell
a plugin to perform an action on the native side and have the plugin execute
that action and return a result. Channels work by sending messages between
Flutter and the native code. These messages are serialized in a format that
both sides can understand. The MethodChannel is the most common
channel and is used to invoke methods on the native side and return a result.
MethodChannels just require a name that needs to be the same on both
sides of the channel. On the native side, you would create a
MethodChannel with a channel name and the type of messenger used to
process messages. This is usually a BinaryMessenger. If you have your

--- Page 611 ---
own way of sending messages, you would implement your own messenger.
To create a MethodChannel you would use the following:
channel = MethodChannel(flutterPluginBinding.binaryMessenger, "
<channel name>")
This binaryMessenger comes from the onAttachedToEngine method,
which looks as follows on Android:
    override fun onAttachedToEngine(flutterPluginBinding: 
FlutterPlugin.FlutterPluginBinding) {
It looks like this on iOS:
  public static func register(with registrar: FlutterPluginRegistrar) {
The easiest way to start working on a Plugin is to use the flutter create –
template=plugin command. This creates the needed starting project for
you. This will consist of the following:
• Dart-based project for the plugin.
• Example project to test your plugin.
• Platform folders for each platform that is iOS, Android, etc.
Inside the Dart-based project, you will have a lib folder with three files. If
the project is named movie_plugin then they will be:
• movie_plugin.dart
• movie_plugin_method_channel.dart
• movie_plugin_platform_interface.dart
The MoviePlugin class will define all of the methods that are available for
this plugin. This file will just call methods from the MoviePluginPlatform
class. The MoviePluginPlatform extends the PlatformInterface which has
a few methods for identifying it and then dummy methods. These methods
throw an UnimplementedError. The reason for this is that each platform
has to implement this method. If they do not, then this error will be thrown.
For example, if you write the Android native portion but then try to run the
app on iOS, you will get this error. This will remind you that you have to
implement iOS. The MoviePluginPlatform creates a static instance of the
MethodChannelMoviePlugin class. As its name implies, this class creates
a MethodChannel with the name movie_plugin. The
MethodChannelMoviePlugin class then calls the invokeMethod function

--- Page 612 ---
on the method channel that takes a return type, the string value of the
method name, and any arguments. The argument types are dynamic,
meaning they can be anything that can be serialized. The author usually
uses JSON as it is easy to use on both sides of the plugin. An example
would be:
return methodChannel.invokeMethod<String?>(‘getString’, {'key': key });
This calls the native getString method passing in a map argument with a
key value. The return value is a nullable string, meaning that the call may
not find a string. Just remember that it looks like:
return methodChannel.invokeMethod<return value>(method name, list of 
arguments);
One other important channel type is the EventChannel. This is a great way
to send messages from the plugin to the user. This class takes a messenger
and a channel name like the MethodChannel. In the native code, you need
to set a stream handler. This handler must implement the onListen and
onCancel methods. The onListen method will return an EventSink class
that you will use to send messages. The EventSink interface looks like:
    public interface EventSink {
        void success(Object var1);
        void error(String var1, String var2, Object var3);
        void endOfStream();
    }
Sending JSON values of events to the success method works well. The
Flutter app will then listen to the EventChannel and handle any events.
EventChannels are a great way for a Flutter app to listen for events that
have not been specifically requested. For example, you may get a native
Bluetooth event that you want to send to your Flutter app.
Building a plugin
For this chapter, we will be building a plugin that will replace the
shared_preferences plugin. This plugin saves primitive values to local
storage. This is a relatively easy set of methods. For the Android portion, it
will use the SharedPreferences class, and for iOS, it will use the
UserDefaults class.

--- Page 613 ---
Creating the plugin
While you can create the plugin through your IDE, we will be creating it
through the terminal so you can see the parameters needed. Since we are
building this for Android and iOS, we will be specifying those platforms. To
create the plugin, you will use the flutter create command with the plugin
template. The steps are as follows:
1. From the terminal, go to the folder above your project:
cd ..
2. Type:
flutter create --org=com.bpb --template=plugin --
platforms=android,ios movie_plugin
This will create a plugin with a com.bpb.movie_plugin package with
Android and iOS native code.
3. Open the project from your IDE. For Android Studio, you can also
open up the Android project that is part of this plugin. The reason is
that Android Studio handles the project as an Android project when you
open up that folder. So, you will have your movies, movie_plugin, and
movie_plugin/android projects open. In the movie_plugin project,
you will first see the README.md file. This has some dummy
information that you will need to change if you want to publish your
plugin. Open up pubspec.yaml. Most of this looks the same as a
regular Flutter project. There are two main differences:
• No publish_to field
• Extra homepage field
There is also an example project inside. This project is useful for testing the
plugin. We will be using this project to bring up a simple one-screen app for
testing shared preferences:

--- Page 614 ---
Figure 17.2: Plugin example app
This has four sections. The first one is for setting the key/value pair for
strings, the second for ints, the third for Booleans, and the fourth for

--- Page 615 ---
doubles. This will allow us to test setting, retrieving, and clearing values.
You will want to enter a key and then a value, click the Set Value button
and then click the Get Value button to see if the value shows up in the line
below. Then try pressing the Clear button and then the Get button to make
sure it is gone. If all of these areas work, you know your plugin is working.
If they do not, you can fix that area.
Building the plugin
In the movie_plugin project, you will see the three generated files. Open up
movie_plugin.dart. This has a generated getPlatformVersion default
method. Try running the example project. It should look like:
Figure 17.3: iOS starting plugin example app

--- Page 616 ---
This is running on iOS. For Android, it will look as follows:
Figure 17.4: Android plugin example app
Android plugin
Now, open up the Android project. This will be the Android folder inside of
the movie_plugin folder. While this project builds from the main
movie_plugin project, Android Studio does not know anything about the
Flutter system. If you open MoviePlugin.kt, you will see lots of errors for
files it cannot find. While you could edit these files knowing that the main
movie_plugin project would be able to build them, it is easier to work in
this project with everything compiling correctly in this sub-project. We will
do some gradle magic to fix this. The steps are as follows:

--- Page 617 ---
1. Open up settings.gradle. Add the following:
pluginManagement {
    def flutterSdkPath = {
        def properties = new Properties()
        file("local.properties").withInputStream { properties.load(it) }
        def flutterSdkPath = properties.getProperty("flutter.sdk")
        assert flutterSdkPath != null, "flutter.sdk not set in 
local.properties"
        return flutterSdkPath
    }
    settings.ext.flutterSdkPath = flutterSdkPath()
    
includeBuild("${settings.ext.flutterSdkPath}/packages/flutter_tools/gra
dle/")
    repositories {
        google()
        mavenCentral()
        gradlePluginPortal()
    }
}
plugins {
    id "dev.flutter.flutter-plugin-loader" version "1.0.0"
    id "com.android.library" version "8.1.4" apply false
    id "org.jetbrains.kotlin.android" version "1.9.24" apply false
}
What this does is set a variable to point to your local.properties file
which should have the location of where Flutter is installed. It will then
include the Flutter gradle build file and then apply some plugins.
2. Open build.gradle. Add the following to the top of the file:
def localProperties = new Properties()
def localPropertiesFile = rootProject.file('local.properties')
if (localPropertiesFile.exists()) {
    localPropertiesFile.withReader('UTF-8') { reader ->

--- Page 618 ---
        localProperties.load(reader)
    }
}
def flutterRoot = localProperties.getProperty('flutter.sdk')
if (flutterRoot == null) {
    throw new GradleException("Flutter SDK not found. Define location 
with flutter.sdk in the local.properties file.")
}
This does the same thing and gets the location of Flutter.
3. Find the dependencies section and add this line:
// This allows the Plugin code to compile
compileOnly files("$flutterRoot/bin/cache/artifacts/engine/android-
arm64/flutter.jar")
4. Do a Gradle sync. This can be done by either of these two buttons.
Figure 17.5: Gradle sync
Going back to MoviePlugin.kt, you will see that all of the errors are gone.
You can now start work. Since we are working on replicating the
SharedPreferences plugin we will want all of the methods that we use in
the Prefs.dart file:
1. Remove this import as it is not needed:
import androidx.annotation.NonNull
2. Add an enum for all of the method calls we will support above the
MoviePlugin class:
enum class MethodCalls(val value: String) {
    GetString("getString"),

--- Page 619 ---
    SetString("setString"),
    Clear("clear"),
    ContainsKey("containsKey"),
    GetInt("getInt"),
    SetInt("setInt"),
    GetDouble("getDouble"),
    SetDouble("setDouble"),
    GetBool("getBool"),
    SetBool("setBool"),
}
This just defines some enums we can use that will define in one place
the strings that should be used. Note that it is important that the strings
match both name and case.
3. Before the onAttachedToEngine method add the following fields:
  private lateinit var context: Context
private lateinit var sharedPreferences: SharedPreferences
Then add the imports needed. This will let us save a Context and
create a SharedPreferences instance.
4. Add the following to the onAttachedToEngine method after the
channel setup:
    context = flutterPluginBinding.applicationContext
    sharedPreferences = context.getSharedPreferences("movie_plugin", 
Context.MODE_PRIVATE)
Luckily, the passed in flutterPluginBinding has a Context we can use.
This is needed to get the SharedPreferences.
5. In the onMethodCall call, replace the code with:
        Log.e("MoviePlugin", "onMethodCall: ${call.method}")
        when (call.method) {
            MethodCalls.GetString.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                Log.e("MoviePlugin", "key: $key")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 

--- Page 620 ---
null", null)
                    return
                }
                getString(key, result)
            }
       }
Add the Log import. This will help us when we are testing. This is just
the getString call. Notice that we have not written the getString
method yet. What this does is check the string of the call.method and
match it to our enum value. The MethodCall class also contains
arguments. For the getString call, we are expecting a key argument,
and it will return a nullable string. We return an error if the key
argument is not found. We then pass the key and the result class to the
getString method. For plugins, it is critical to set the result value for
the caller to check the result.
6. Add the getString method to the bottom of the file:
    private fun getString(key: String, result: Result) {
  val value = sharedPreferences.getString(key, null)
        Log.e("MoviePlugin", "getString: key: $key value: $value")
        result.success(value)
    }
This method takes the key and uses the sharedPreferences class to get
the string associated with that key. We then set the result’s success
method with that value. Note that this value can be null. We will be
doing something similar for the other types.
7. Add the setString method:
    private fun setString(key: String, value: String, result: Result) {
      val commitResult = sharedPreferences.edit().putString(key, 
value).commit()
      Log.e("MoviePlugin", "setString: key: $key value: $value 
commitResult: $commitResult")
      result.success(commitResult)
    }

--- Page 621 ---
This method will save the value with the given key. In Android, you
need to call the edit method, call putXXX, and then the commit
method.
Note: There are newer ways to do this in Android, but we will just be covering the easiest
way.
Next, we need to add two methods for clearing and checking for the
key:
8. Add the clear and containsKey methods:
    private fun clear(result: Result) {
        val commitResult = sharedPreferences.edit().clear().commit()
        result.success(commitResult)
    }
    private fun containsKey(key: String, result: Result) {
        val value = sharedPreferences.contains(key)
        result.success(value)
    }
Remember to always call result.success or result.error.
9. Add the int methods:
    private fun getInt(key: String, result: Result) {
        val value = sharedPreferences.getInt(key, 0)
        result.success(value)
    }
    private fun setInt(key: String, value: Int, result: Result) {
        val commitResult = sharedPreferences.edit().putInt(key, 
value).commit()
        result.success(commitResult)
    }
10. Add the Double methods:
    private fun getDouble(key: String, result: Result) {
        val value = sharedPreferences.getFloat(key, 0.0f).toDouble()
        result.success(value)
    }
    private fun setDouble(key: String, value: Double, result: Result) {

--- Page 622 ---
        val commitResult = sharedPreferences.edit().putFloat(key, 
value.toFloat()).commit()
        result.success(commitResult)
    }
11. Add the Boolean methods:
    private fun getBool(key: String, result: Result) {
        val value = sharedPreferences.getBoolean(key, false)
        result.success(value)
    }
    private fun setBool(key: String, value: Boolean, result: Result) {
        val commitResult = sharedPreferences.edit().putBoolean(key, 
value).commit()
        result.success(commitResult)
    }
12. Now, return to the onMethodCall method and add the handling of the
setString, clear and ContainsKey methods:
            MethodCalls.SetString.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                val value = call.argument<String>("value")
                Log.e("MoviePlugin", "key: $key value: $value")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                if (value == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "value cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                setString(key, value, result)
            }
            MethodCalls.Clear.value -> {
                clear(result)

--- Page 623 ---
            }
            MethodCalls.ContainsKey.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                containsKey(key, result)
            }
13. Add the int method calls:
            MethodCalls.GetInt.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                getInt(key, result)
            }
            MethodCalls.SetInt.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                val value = call.argument<Int>("value")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                if (value == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "value cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                setInt(key, value, result)

--- Page 624 ---
            }
14. Add the Double calls:
            MethodCalls.GetDouble.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                getDouble(key, result)
            }
            MethodCalls.SetDouble.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                val value = call.argument<Double>("value")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                if (value == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "value cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                setDouble(key, value, result)
            }
15. Add the Boolean calls:
            MethodCalls.GetBool.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }

--- Page 625 ---
                getBool(key, result)
            }
            MethodCalls.SetBool.value -> {
                val key = call.argument<String>("key")
                val value = call.argument<Boolean>("value")
                if (key == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "Key cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                if (value == null) {
                    result.error("INVALID_ARGUMENT", "value cannot be 
null", null)
                    return
                }
                setBool(key, value, result)
            }
Plugin files
So far, we have just built the Android portion of the plugin. The movie app
needs an interface to talk to, and that is where the movie_plugin.dart file
comes in. This is the entry point and main interface for the plugin. What we
need is a way for the movie app to talk to this dart entry point, which then
calls the appropriate native code. In our case, either Android or iOS. It does
this by sending the method call on the MethodChannel. The running native
code will be listening on that channel for the method call. Let us start with
the MoviePluginPlatform class:
1. Open up movie_plugin_platform_interface.dart.
2. Remove the getPlatformVersion method.
3. Add the following methods. These methods will not do anything but
are the interface for the plugin.
  Future<String?> getString(String key) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('getString has not been implemented.');
  }

--- Page 626 ---
  Future setString(String key, String value) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('setString has not been implemented.');
  }
  Future clear() async {
    throw UnimplementedError('clear has not been implemented.');
  }
  Future<bool?> containsKey(String key) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('containsKey has not been 
implemented.');
  }
  Future<int?> getInt(String key) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('getInt has not been implemented.');
  }
  Future setInt(String key, int value) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('setInt has not been implemented.');
  }
  Future<bool?> getBool(String key) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('getBool has not been implemented.');
  }
  Future setBool(String key, bool value) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('setBool has not been implemented.');
  }
  Future<double?> getDouble(String key) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('getDouble has not been implemented.');
  }
  Future setDouble(String key, double value) async {
    throw UnimplementedError('setDouble has not been implemented.');
  }
Notice the UnimplementedError. This will be thrown on any platform
that has not been written or implemented yet.
4. Open up movie_plugin_method_channel.dart.
5. Add the same MethodCalls enum above the class:
enum MethodCalls {
  getString('getString'),

--- Page 627 ---
  setString('setString'),
  clear('clear'),
  containsKey('containsKey'),
  getInt('getInt'),
  setInt('setInt'),
  getBool('getBool'),
  setBool('setBool'),
  getDouble('getDouble'),
  setDouble('setDouble');
  final String value;
  const MethodCalls(this.value);
}
6. Now replace getPlatformVersion with:
  @override
  Future<String?> getString(String key) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<String?>
(MethodCalls.getString.value, {'key': key });
  }
  @override
  Future setString(String key, String value) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<void>
(MethodCalls.setString.value, {'key': key, 'value': value });
  }
  @override
  Future clear() async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<void>
(MethodCalls.clear.value);
  }
  @override
  Future<bool?> containsKey(String key) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<bool>
(MethodCalls.containsKey.value, {'key': key });
  }

--- Page 628 ---
  @override
  Future<int?> getInt(String key) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<int?>
(MethodCalls.getInt.value, {'key': key });
  }
  @override
  Future setInt(String key, int value) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<void>
(MethodCalls.setInt.value, {'key': key, 'value': value });
  }
  @override
  Future<bool?> getBool(String key) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<bool?>
(MethodCalls.getBool.value, {'key': key });
  }
  @override
  Future setBool(String key, bool value) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<void>
(MethodCalls.setBool.value, {'key': key, 'value': value });
  }
  @override
  Future<double?> getDouble(String key) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<double?>
(MethodCalls.getDouble.value, {'key': key });
  }
  @override
  Future setDouble(String key, double value) async {
    return methodChannel.invokeMethod<void>
(MethodCalls.setDouble.value, {'key': key, 'value': value });
  }
This just calls the invokeMethod call with the name of the method and
the arguments.
7. Open movie_plugin.dart and replace getPlatformVersion with:

--- Page 629 ---
  Future<String?> getString(String key) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.getString(key);
  }
  Future setString(String key, String value) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.setString(key, value);
  }
  Future clear() async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.clear();
  }
  Future<bool?> containsKey(String key) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.containsKey(key);
  }
  Future<int?> getInt(String key) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.getInt(key);
  }
  Future setInt(String key, int value) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.setInt(key, value);
  }
  Future<double?> getDouble(String key) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.getDouble(key);
  }
  Future setDouble(String key, double value) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.setDouble(key, value);
  }
  Future<bool?> getBool(String key) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.getBool(key);
  }
  Future setBool(String key, bool value) async {
    return MoviePluginPlatform.instance.setBool(key, value);
  }
This will call the MoviePluginPlatform’s version of each method. If
you look at the files on the left you will see several files that have a red
underline. This means they all have errors.
8. Delete the movie_plugin_method_channel_test.dart and

--- Page 630 ---
movie_plugin_test.dart. files in the example/test folder. We will be
writing tests in the next chapter.
9. Delete the plugin_integration_test.dart file in the
example/integration_test folder.
Note that tests will be written in the next chapter that discusses writing
tests.
Example plugin app
In order to test our plugin, it helps to have an example app that we can test
with. Figure 17.1 shows what the app will look like. All of the code will be
in main.dart.
1. Delete the initState and initPlatformState methods along with
_platformVersion variable.
2. Open up main.dart in the example/lib folder. We need text controllers
for each field. Add the controllers and strings after the _moviePlugin
variable:
  TextEditingController stringKeyTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  TextEditingController stringValueTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  TextEditingController intKeyTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  TextEditingController intValueTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  TextEditingController boolKeyTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  TextEditingController boolValueTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  TextEditingController doubleKeyTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  TextEditingController doubleValueTextController = 
TextEditingController();
  String currentStringValue = '';

--- Page 631 ---
  String currentIntValue = '';
  String currentBoolValue = '';
  String currentDoubleValue = '';
3. Replace the build method with:
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp(
      home: Scaffold(
        appBar: AppBar(
          title: const Text('Plugin example app'),
        ),
        body: CustomScrollView(
          slivers: [
            SliverList(
              delegate: SliverChildListDelegate(
                [
// TODO Add Fields
                ],
              ),
            ),
          ],
        ),
      ),
    );
  }
4. Replace the TODO with:
                  Padding(
                    padding: const EdgeInsets.all(16.0),
                    child: Column(
                      crossAxisAlignment: CrossAxisAlignment.start,
                      children: [
                      ],

--- Page 632 ---
                    ),
                  ),
5. For the children add the first two text fields:
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'String Key',
                            // hintStyle: TextStyle(color: Colors.black),
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.next,
                          controller: stringKeyTextController,
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'String Value',
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.done,
                          controller: stringValueTextController,
                        ),
6. Add the first button row and the text:
                        Padding(
                          padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
                          child: Row(
                            children: [
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (stringKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty &&
                                        stringValueTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      await _moviePlugin.setString(

--- Page 633 ---
                                          stringKeyTextController.text,
                                          stringValueTextController.text);
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Set Value')),
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (stringKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      final currentString = await _moviePlugin
                                          .getString(stringKeyTextController.text);
                                      if (currentString != null) {
                                        setState(() {
                                          currentStringValue = currentString;
                                        });
                                      }
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Get Value')),
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    final currentString =
                                        await _moviePlugin.clear();
                                    if (currentString != null) {
                                      setState(() {
                                        currentStringValue = '';
                                      });
                                    }
                                  },

--- Page 634 ---
                                  child: const Text('Clear')),
                            ],
                          ),
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        Text('Current String Value is $currentStringValue'),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
7. Add the Int fields and text:
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'Int Key',
                            // hintStyle: TextStyle(color: Colors.black),
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.next,
                          controller: intKeyTextController,
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'Int Value',
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.done,
                          keyboardType: TextInputType.number,
                          inputFormatters: <TextInputFormatter>[
                            FilteringTextInputFormatter.digitsOnly,

--- Page 635 ---
                          ],
                          controller: intValueTextController,
                        ),
                        Padding(
                          padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
                          child: Row(
                            children: [
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (intKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty &&
                                        intValueTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      await _moviePlugin.setInt(
                                          intKeyTextController.text,
                                          int.parse(intValueTextController.text));
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Set Value')),
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (intKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      final currentValue = await _moviePlugin
                                          .getInt(intKeyTextController.text);
                                      if (currentValue != null) {
                                        setState(() {
                                          currentIntValue = '$currentValue';
                                        });
                                      }
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Get Value')),

--- Page 636 ---
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    final currentString =
                                    await _moviePlugin.clear();
                                    if (currentString != null) {
                                      setState(() {
                                        currentIntValue = '';
                                      });
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Clear')),
                            ],
                          ),
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        Text('Current Int Value is $currentIntValue'),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
8. Add the Boolean text fields:
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'Bool Key',
                            // hintStyle: TextStyle(color: Colors.black),
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.next,
                          controller: boolKeyTextController,

--- Page 637 ---
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'Bool Value',
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.done,
                          controller: boolValueTextController,
                        ),
                        Padding(
                          padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
                          child: Row(
                            children: [
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (boolKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty &&
                                        boolValueTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      await _moviePlugin.setBool(
                                          boolKeyTextController.text,
                                          boolValueTextController.text == 'true');
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Set Value')),
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (boolKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      final currentBool = await _moviePlugin

--- Page 638 ---
                                          .getBool(boolKeyTextController.text);
                                      if (currentBool != null) {
                                        setState(() {
                                          currentBoolValue = '$currentBool';
                                        });
                                      }
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Get Value')),
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    final currentBool =
                                    await _moviePlugin.clear();
                                    if (currentBool != null) {
                                      setState(() {
                                        currentBoolValue = '';
                                      });
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Clear')),
                            ],
                          ),
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        Text('Current Bool Value is $currentBoolValue'),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),

--- Page 639 ---
9. Add the double fields:
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'Double Key',
                            // hintStyle: TextStyle(color: Colors.black),
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.next,
                          controller: doubleKeyTextController,
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        TextField(
                          decoration: const InputDecoration(
                            border: InputBorder.none,
                            hintText: 'Double Value',
                          ),
                          textInputAction: TextInputAction.done,
                          keyboardType: TextInputType.number,
                          inputFormatters: <TextInputFormatter>[
                            FilteringTextInputFormatter.allow(RegExp(r'^\d+\.?
\d{0,2}')),
                          ],
                          controller: doubleValueTextController,
                        ),
                        Padding(
                          padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
                          child: Row(
                            children: [
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (doubleKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty 

--- Page 640 ---
&&
                                        doubleValueTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      await _moviePlugin.setDouble(
                                          doubleKeyTextController.text,
                                          
double.parse(doubleValueTextController.text));
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Set Value')),
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    if (doubleKeyTextController.text.isNotEmpty) {
                                      final currentValue = await _moviePlugin
                                          .getDouble(doubleKeyTextController.text);
                                      if (currentValue != null) {
                                        setState(() {
                                          currentDoubleValue = '$currentValue';
                                        });
                                      }
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Get Value')),
                              const SizedBox(
                                width: 8,
                              ),
                              ElevatedButton(
                                  onPressed: () async {
                                    final currentString =
                                    await _moviePlugin.clear();
                                    if (currentString != null) {

--- Page 641 ---
                                      setState(() {
                                        currentDoubleValue = '';
                                      });
                                    }
                                  },
                                  child: const Text('Clear')),
                            ],
                          ),
                        ),
                        const SizedBox(
                          height: 16,
                        ),
                        Text('Current Double Value is $currentDoubleValue'),
Now, run the example app on Android. Fill in the string key and value and
press the Set Value button. After entering MyStringKey for the key and
MyStringValue for the key, pressing the Set Value button and then the Get
Value button, you should see the text field show the value:

--- Page 642 ---
Figure 17.6: Testing plugin
Go ahead and test the other fields to make sure they work. If they do not,
then you will need to debug or print logging statements to find out why.
iOS plugin
Now that we know Android works, it is time to build out the iOS side.
Luckily, this will entail just one file. In the plugin’s ios/Classes folder, open
up MoviePlugin.swift. This is the swift file for our plugin. We will be

--- Page 643 ---
writing almost the same code as in Android’s Kotlin but using Swift. The
steps are as follows:
1. Add the MethodCalls enum above the class:
enum MethodCalls: String {
  case getString = "getString"
  case setString = "setString"
  case clear = "clear"
  case containsKey = "containsKey"
  case getInt = "getInt"
  case setInt = "setInt"
  case getBool = "getBool"
  case setBool = "setBool"
  case getDouble = "getDouble"
  case setDouble = "setDouble"
}
2. Inside of the handle method, replace the current code with:
        let args = call.arguments as? [String: Any]
    switch MethodCalls(rawValue: call.method) {
    case .getString:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      getString(key: key, result: result)
    case .setString:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String, let value = args?["value"] 
as? String else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      setString(key: key, value: value, result: result)
    case .clear:
      clear()

--- Page 644 ---
      result(true)
    case .containsKey:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String else {
        result(false)
        break
      }
      containsKey(key: key, result: result)
    case .getInt:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      getInt(key: key, result: result)
    case .setInt:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String, let value = args?["value"] 
as? Int else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      setInt(key: key, value: value, result: result)
    case .getBool:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      getBool(key: key, result: result)
    case .setBool:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String, let value = args?["value"] 
as? Bool else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      setBool(key: key, value: value, result: result)

--- Page 645 ---
    case .getDouble:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      getDouble(key: key, result: result)
    case .setDouble:
      guard let key = args?["key"] as? String, let value = args?["value"] 
as? Double else {
        result(false)
        return
      }
      setDouble(key: key, value: value, result: result)
    default:
      result(FlutterMethodNotImplemented)
    }
While this code looks a bit different, it is very similar to Android. The
only differences are the switch statement and the guard/let commands
that are common in Swift. The guard/let is a way to set a variable, and
if the condition is false, return false.
3. Add the string methods:
  func getString(key: String, result: @escaping FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    result(defaults.string(forKey: key))
  }
  func setString(key: String, value: String, result: @escaping 
FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    defaults.set(value, forKey: key)
    result(true)
  }
This uses the UserDefaults class for iOS, which can store and retrieve
simple values, just like Android’s SharedPreferences.

--- Page 646 ---
4. Add the clear and containsKey methods:
  func clear() {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    if let appDomain = Bundle.main.bundleIdentifier,
      let prefs = defaults.persistentDomain(forName: appDomain)
    {
      for (key, _) in prefs {
        defaults.removeObject(forKey: key)
      }
    }
  }
  func containsKey(key: String, result: @escaping FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    let value = defaults.object(forKey: key)
    result(value != nil)
  }
5. Add the int methods:
  func getInt(key: String, result: @escaping FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    result(defaults.integer(forKey: key))
  }
  func setInt(key: String, value: Int, result: @escaping FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    defaults.set(value, forKey: key)
    result(true)
  }
6. Add the bool methods:
  func getBool(key: String, result: @escaping FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    result(defaults.bool(forKey: key))
  }
  func setBool(key: String, value: Bool, result: @escaping 
FlutterResult) {

--- Page 647 ---
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    defaults.set(value, forKey: key)
    result(true)
  }
7. Add the double methods:
  func getDouble(key: String, result: @escaping FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    result(defaults.double(forKey: key))
  }
  func setDouble(key: String, value: Double, result: @escaping 
FlutterResult) {
    let defaults = UserDefaults.standard
    defaults.set(value, forKey: key)
    result(true)
  }
Now, run the example app on an iPhone or iOS simulator. You should see
the same screen, and the results should be the same. If you get any compile
errors, check to make sure you entered the code correctly.
Movies app
That takes care of the Android and iOS plugin package.
1. Return to the movies package and open the pubspec.yaml file.
2. Add the following after the movie_data:
  movie_plugin:
    path: ../movie_plugin
This will add the movie_plugin plugin.
3. Do a Pub Get.
4. Open providers.dart. Replace the prefs entry and add one for the
movie_plugin:
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
Prefs prefs(PrefsRef ref) {
  return Prefs(ref.read(moviePluginProvider));

--- Page 648 ---
}
@Riverpod(keepAlive: true)
MoviePlugin moviePlugin(MoviePluginRef ref) {
  return MoviePlugin();
}
This replaces SharedPreferences with our movie plugin.
5. In a terminal run:
dart run build_runner build
6. Open up the prefs.dart file in the utils directory.
7. Replace the preferences variable with:
  final MoviePlugin preferences;
8. Remove the SharedPreference import and add the MoviePlugin
import.
9. Change all of the methods to:
  Future setString(String key, String value) async {
    preferences.setString(key, value);
  }
  Future<String?> getString(String key) async {
    return await preferences.getString(key);
  }
  Future setInt(String key, int value) async {
    preferences.setInt(key, value);
  }
  Future<int?> getInt(String key) async {
    return preferences.getInt(key);
  }
  Future setBool(String key, bool value) async {
    preferences.setBool(key, value);
  }
  Future<bool?> getBool(String key) async {
    return preferences.getBool(key);
  }

--- Page 649 ---
  Future setDouble(String key, double value) async {
    preferences.setDouble(key, value);
  }
  Future<double?> getDouble(String key) async {
    return preferences.getDouble(key);
  }
The only difference is that these return a Future of the value. If you
look at the files that have errors, the only one left is the
genre_screen.dart. Since our version of prefs returns futures, we need
to change the code a bit to wait for the values.
10. Open genre_screen.dart. Go to the saveSelectedGenres method.
Replace the contents with:
    final prefs = ref.read(prefsProvider);
    final genreNameList = genreStates.map((state) => 
state.genre.name).toList();
    await prefs.setString(genreStringKey, genreNameList.join(','));
11. Replace the first two lines of the getSelectedGenres method:
    final prefs = ref.read(prefsProvider);
    var genreNameList = (await 
prefs.getString(genreStringKey))?.split(',');
Try running the Movies app on both Android and iOS. Go to the Genre
screen and select a few genres. If you stop and restart your app, it should
remember the genres you selected.
That was a lot of work, but you created your very own plugin that is very
similar to one on pub.dev. Now you know how to build your own, so that
any time you come across any missing functionality in Flutter that is
implemented on the native side, you will be able to build your own. You can
also use what you learned in the last chapter to publish this plugin just like
you would a package.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned about plugins and how to build them. You
learned that you need to write native code for each platform you support.

--- Page 650 ---
While a lot more difficult than writing straight Flutter Dart code, it is very
satisfying to create a plugin that implements native code. If your plugin is
useful, publish it on pub.dev and share it with others. Who knows, you
could become a famous plugin developer.
In the next chapter, we will implement tests for our plugin as well as tests
for the movie app. This will help us be assured that our plugin and app
function the way they should, and if anything breaks in your code, your
tests should let you know before it is too late.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 651 ---
CHAPTER 18
Testing and Performance
Introduction
Flutter is a very fast framework, and normally, you will not need to worry
about performance. However, there are times when parts of your app may
show performance problems. In addition, testing your app will ensure that it
performs the way you expect and is as fast as you need it to. In this chapter,
you will learn about the different types of testing, how to write tests for your
app or plugin, how to write UI tests, and how to view performance
information. With this information, you can make sure new code does not
break existing functionality by monitoring tests and making sure they do not
break. You will also be able to find areas in your app that are slowing down
parts of your app. Flutter includes a lot of tools for writing tests and
measuring your app’s performance.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Testing
• Unit testing
• Widget testing
• Integration
• Performance

--- Page 652 ---
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will know about the three different types of
testing and how to write those tests. You will know when to write unit tests
when to write widget tests, and when to write integration tests. Finally, you
will understand how to use Flutter’s DevTools to measure performance.
Testing
Testing is a way to make sure your app functions properly and, more
importantly, that it will catch changes in your code that break how your app
works. Testing helps identify bugs in your code and can even be used in the
creation of code. In test-driven development (TDD), you write your tests
first before you write your code. While we will not be using this in this
chapter, it is a popular way to write code because you have several
advantages:
• Improved code quality: Testing improves the code you write because it
has to be testable.
• Higher test coverage: By writing tests first, you ensure you have more
tests covering all parts of your app.
• Higher confidence: More tests make you more confident that your code
will work the way you expect.
The way testing works is:
• Write a failing test: Write the test that tests what you want your class to
achieve. You will have to write the bare minimum for the class, but with
no functionality, it will fail.
• Fix the failing test: Write code that causes the test to pass.
• Refactor: Clean up the code.
• Repeat
In Flutter (and other platforms), there are three different types of tests:
• Unit tests: Test a single class or method. This will be for testing how a
function or class works.
• Widget tests: Test a single Flutter widget. This test will ensure the
widget performs properly in multiple states. For example, a switch

--- Page 653 ---
shows that it is on when that state is set and off when the state has been
turned off.
• Integration tests: Tests parts of an app and the integration of multiple
screens. This could be a sign-in screen with dialogs and other screens
associated with the sign-in functionality.
One nice feature of tests is that there are mocking libraries that allow you to
mock functionality. For example, say you have an API for logging into a
system. You may not want to have to log a user in to run a test. By using a
mocking library, you can mock the API, and have it return login information
or just return that the user is logged in.
Unit testing
Unit tests are usually the easiest to write. They are usually just Dart code and
not Flutter. They will test to make sure the function returns the correct value
for the different input values. These are usually pretty easy to maintain, but
they only test a very small part of your app and only give you confidence in
that one function. Unit tests do not test UI but functionality. You could use it
to test a view model or classes that perform calculations. All unit tests go in
the test folder.
Each test file in the test folder will need to import the test package:
import 'package:test/test.dart';
Each test will have a main function. Inside that function, you will usually
use the test method that takes the name of the test and a function. This looks
like:
testWidgets('<name of test>', (WidgetTester tester) async {
}
The testing package contains functions that will test the values of your tests.
This is the expect function. This takes the actual value, a matcher, and a
reason string that will be printed if it fails. This looks like:
Expect(<actual result>, <what we should get>, ‘optional reason why it 
failed’)
This is how you make sure your test is producing the correct result. If this
fails, the whole test fails. If you perform a computation and that function
should always return the same value given a certain input, then if that

--- Page 654 ---
function changes, your test will fail, and you will either have to fix your
function or change the test to reflect the change.
Movie plugin unit test
We will be writing a unit test to test the functionality of the methods of the
MoviePlugin. While we are not running on an actual device, we need to
mock the underlying storage. Mocking is a way to create fake classes that
either do nothing or return values that we want them to. This way, we can
test the actual class without worrying about the other classes it uses. For the
MoviePlugin class, we need to mock the prefs portion of the plugin. Let us
create the movie plugin test:
1. Open the movie_plugin project.
2. Add the test dependency. In a terminal type:
flutter pub add dev:test
3. In the test folder, create a new file named movie_plugin_test.dart.
4. Add the following imports:
import 'package:test/test.dart';
import 'package:movie_plugin/movie_plugin.dart';
import 'package:movie_plugin/movie_plugin_platform_interface.dart';
import 
'package:plugin_platform_interface/plugin_platform_interface.dart';
5. Create the MockMoviePluginPlatform class:
class MockMoviePluginPlatform
    with MockPlatformInterfaceMixin
    implements MoviePluginPlatform {
  // Add Code Here
}
Note that MockPlatformInterfaceMixin is part of Flutter’s plugin
platform interface.
6. Create a map to store the preferences:
  Map<String, dynamic> mockPrefs = <String, dynamic>{};
7. Start implementing the methods of the MoviePluginPlatform:
  @override

--- Page 655 ---
  Future clear() {
    mockPrefs.clear();
    return Future.value(true);
  }
  @override
  Future<bool?> containsKey(String key) {
    return Future.value(mockPrefs.containsKey(key));
  }
These two methods will clear the map and return the value of the
containsKey method of the map.
8. Add the string methods:
  @override
  Future<String?> getString(String key) {
    return Future.value(mockPrefs[key]);
  }
  @override
  Future setString(String key, String value) {
    mockPrefs[key] = value;
    return Future.value(true);
  }
9. Add the int methods:
  Future<int?> getInt(String key) async {
    return Future.value(mockPrefs[key]);
  }
  @override
  Future setInt(String key, int value) async {
    mockPrefs[key] = value;
    return Future.value(true);
  }
These just use the map to set and retrieve values.
10. Add the Boolean methods:
  @override
  Future<bool?> getBool(String key) async {

--- Page 656 ---
    return Future.value(mockPrefs[key]);
  }
  @override
  Future setBool(String key, bool value) async {
    mockPrefs[key] = value;
    return Future.value(true);
  }
11. Add the double methods:
  @override
  Future<double?> getDouble(String key) async {
    return Future.value(mockPrefs[key]);
  }
  @override
  Future setDouble(String key, double value) async {
    mockPrefs[key] = value;
    return Future.value(true);
  }
Now that we have the mock class written, let us start writing the tests.
12. Add a main function after the MockMoviePluginPlatform class:
void main() {
}
13. Add the first test for the setString method:
  test('setString: Add One item', () async {
    MoviePlugin moviePlugin = MoviePlugin();
    MockMoviePluginPlatform fakePlatform = 
MockMoviePluginPlatform();
    MoviePluginPlatform.instance = fakePlatform;
    expect(await moviePlugin.setString('Test', 'Value 1'), true);
  });
This test creates the MoviePlugin class and sets the
MoviePluginPlatform.instance to our mock platform. We then call the
setString method and make sure it returns true. This is just a very simple
test to make sure we get the expected value back. You will usually want to
build your tests up from simple to more complex and make sure you test all

--- Page 657 ---
conditions that could happen. In writing tests, you will find yourself thinking
about different scenarios that could happen with your code. This will help
you in writing your code and you may find a test that your code does not
cover.
Groups
You can also combine your tests into groups. You would use the group just
like the test method by giving it a name and then the function. That function
will have multiple test functions. It would look something as follows:
group('Test All String methods', () {
    test('setString: Add One item', () {
<Code here>
    });
    test('setString: Add One item and then clear', () {
<Code here>
    });
    test('setString: Add One item and then get the string', () {
<Code here>
    });
  });
1. Click on the green Run button to run the test. You should see:

--- Page 658 ---
Figure 18.1: First test
2. Add the next test for the clear and containsKey functions:
  test('setString: Add One item and then clear', () async {
    MoviePlugin moviePlugin = MoviePlugin();
    MockMoviePluginPlatform fakePlatform = 
MockMoviePluginPlatform();
    MoviePluginPlatform.instance = fakePlatform;
    expect(await moviePlugin.setString('Test', 'Value 1'), true);
    expect(await moviePlugin.clear(), true);
    expect(await moviePlugin.containsKey('Test'), false);
  });
Here, we set the string, clear it, and then make sure that it does not still
exist. Try running these tests. What other tests can you think of?

--- Page 659 ---
3. Next, test setting the value and verifying that the value exists:
  test('setString: Add One item and then get the string', () async {
    MoviePlugin moviePlugin = MoviePlugin();
    MockMoviePluginPlatform fakePlatform = 
MockMoviePluginPlatform();
    MoviePluginPlatform.instance = fakePlatform;
    expect(await moviePlugin.setString('Test', 'Value 1'), true);
    expect(await moviePlugin.getString('Test'), 'Value 1');
  });
We have tested some strings, but we should test the other types as well.
We will test ints. We are starting to see some duplicate code here. You
can create other methods for setup.
4. Add some variables and create a new method just under main:
  late MoviePlugin moviePlugin;
  late MockMoviePluginPlatform fakePlatform;
  void setup() {
    moviePlugin = MoviePlugin();
    fakePlatform = MockMoviePluginPlatform();
    MoviePluginPlatform.instance = fakePlatform;
  }
5. Now replace all this code with:
    setup();
Your first test will look like:
  test('setString: Add One item', () async {
    setup();
    expect(await moviePlugin.setString('Test', 'Value 1'), true);
  });
6. Write the int test:
  test('Test Ints', () async {
    setup();
    expect(await moviePlugin.setInt('IntKey', 1), true);
    expect(await moviePlugin.getInt('IntKey'), 1);
    expect(await moviePlugin.containsKey('IntKey'), true);

--- Page 660 ---
    expect(await moviePlugin.clear(), true);
    expect(await moviePlugin.containsKey('IntKey'), false);
  });
The other tests are left as an exercise for you.
Widget testing
As the name implies, widget testing involves testing just one widget at a
time. These tests are still in the test folder and run in memory on the
development machine and not on a real device. This makes these tests very
fast. Luckily, there is the flutter_test package provided by Flutter. This
package provides the WidgetTester class and the testWidgets function,
which provides a WidgetTester for each test. It also provides Finder classes
for searching for widgets. Then, you will use Matcher constants to verify
the widget. You will need to import the flutter_test package. You should
already have it in pubspec.yaml, but it will be in the dev_dependencies
section and look as follows:
dev_dependencies:
  flutter_test:
    sdk: flutter
With the WidgetTester class, there are a few important methods. For testing
widgets, the pumpWidget method will display your widget. There is also a
pumpAndSettle method that will wait for all animations to finish, and there
are no more frames to display. Once you have your widget displayed, you
need to find it and test it to make sure it is displayed the way you expect.
Flutter provides the Finder class that has many methods for finding widgets.
A few important methods:
• text: Find a Text, EditableText, or RichText widget with the given text.
• textContaining: Find the Pattern of text in the above widgets.
• widgetWithText: Look for descendants that are of type Text with the
given text string.
• image: Find an image.
• byKey: Find a widget with the given key.
• bySubtype: Find a widget by sub-type, that is, StatefulWidget will find
all classes that subclass it.

--- Page 661 ---
• byType: Find widgets of a certain type.
• byIcon, widgetWithIcon: Finds a widget containing an icon.
• byTooltip: finds widgets with the given tooltip text.
There are also several methods that let you search through all widgets and
make a decision on each widget. One of the most important methods is the
byWidgetPredicate. Here is a helper method you can use:
Finder findWidgetOfType(Type type) {
  final finder = find.byWidgetPredicate((widget) {
    if (widget.runtimeType == type) {
      return true;
    }
    return false;
  });
  return finder;
}
The callback receives a widget, and it checks to see if the runtimeType is of
a given type. There are many ways can create helper functions to search for
widgets of your making.
Once you find the widget you are looking for, you will use the expect
method with the following matcher types:
• findsOneWidget: Asserts that there is only one widget found.
• findsNothing: Asserts that no widget was found.
• findsWidgets: Asserts that at least one widget was found.
First widget test
Since we have several widgets that we have built over time, they are great
candidates for testing. To start creating a widget test, the steps are as follows:
1. Open up the movies project.
2. In the test folder, create a new file named widget_tests.dart.
3. Add the following imports and the main function:
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_test/flutter_test.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/widgets/text_icon.dart';

--- Page 662 ---
void main() {
} 
4. Add the first test for testing the TextIcon widget:
  testWidgets('Test TextIcon', (WidgetTester tester) async {
    await tester.pumpWidget(TextIcon(
      text: const Text('Test'),
      icon: IconButton(
          onPressed: () {},
          icon: const Icon(
            Icons.favorite_outlined,
            size: 24,
          )),
    ));
    final textFinder = find.text('Test');
    expect(textFinder, findsOneWidget);
  });
5. Try running the test. You should see an error. In the case of the
TextIcon widget, the IconButton requires the MaterialApp or
WidgetsApp to be the parent. Modify the pumpWidget:
    await tester.pumpWidget(MaterialApp(home: TextIcon(
      text: const Text('Test'),
      icon: IconButton(
          onPressed: () {},
          icon: const Icon(
            Icons.favorite_outlined,
            size: 24,
          )),
    )));
6. Now, try running, and your test will pass.
Another simple test is to add a search for the icon.
7. After the expected, add the following:
    final iconFinder = find.byIcon(Icons.favorite_outlined);
    expect(iconFinder, findsOneWidget);

--- Page 663 ---
8. Run the test again.
The next test will be a bit more complex. We want to test the
ButtonRow widget. To do that, we need to display the widget and tap
on the favorite icon. Create a new test in the same file:
9. Add the new test:
  testWidgets('Test ButtonRow', (WidgetTester tester) async {
    await tester.pumpWidget(MaterialApp(home: 
ButtonRow(favoriteSelected: true, onFavoriteSelected: () {
    },
  });
This test is for the ButtonRow widget that we want to test by pressing
the favorite button. We do not need to handle the favorite callback.
10. Next, find the Favorite button and make sure it exists:
    final textFinder = find.text('Favorite');
    expect(textFinder, findsOneWidget);
11. Now find the TextIcon by finding the anscestor of the Text widget
and then the icon button by finding the descendant of that widget:
    final textIconFinder = find.ancestor(of: textFinder, matching: 
find.byType(TextIcon));
    final iconButton = find.descendant(of: textIconFinder, matching: 
find.byType(IconButton));
    expect(iconButton, findsOneWidget);
12. Now find the Icon under that and make sure it is white:
    var iconFinder = find.descendant(of: iconButton, matching: 
find.byType(Icon));
    var icon = tester.widget(iconFinder);
    expect((icon as Icon).color, Colors.white);
The tester.widget method is useful for getting the actual widget. This
way we can test the color of the widget.
13. Now tap the button, wait for the animation to finish, and make sure the
icon is red.
    await tester.tap(iconButton);
    await tester.pump(const Duration(seconds: 3));

--- Page 664 ---
    await tester.idle();
    iconFinder = find.descendant(of: iconButton, matching: 
find.byType(Icon));
    icon = tester.widget(iconFinder);
    expect(icon.color, Colors.red);
14. Run the test to make sure it passes.
These are two examples of testing a widget. As you may have noticed, you
will not see the test on your device. To do that, we will move on to
integration testing.
Integration testing
So far, we have just tested the code and individual widgets. To test your app,
you need to run integration tests. This runs your app on a device and allows
you to interact with the screen as well as navigate to other screens. Usually,
you will test the functionality of a specific area. For example, you could test
a sign-in page. You would have a test user that you can use to sign in and
verify that the user successfully signed in. You could also test entering
invalid data and see how the UI responds.
Note: If you read articles about navigating flutter_driver, that is an older technology and
should not be used.
One area that would be good to test is movie loading and scrolling. The
MovieListing class does some complex paging. What if we could run a test
that navigates to the MovieListing page and scrolls several pages’ worth of
data? To do this, we will create an integration test that sets up the app,
similar to the way it does in main.dart, and then run a testWidgets function.
We will then start the MainApp, click on the first More button, go to the
MovieListing screen, and then scroll several pages and verify that the page
list contains a certain amount of items. This is a bit complex, so we will step
through each part:
1. Create a new folder at the top level named integration_test.
2. Create a new file named movie_tests.dart.
3. Add the following imports:
import 'package:colorize_lumberdash/colorize_lumberdash.dart';
import 'package:firebase_core/firebase_core.dart';

--- Page 665 ---
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flutter_dotenv/flutter_dotenv.dart';
import 'package:flutter_riverpod/flutter_riverpod.dart';
import 'package:flutter_test/flutter_test.dart';
import 
'package:infinite_scroll_pagination/infinite_scroll_pagination.dart';
import 'package:lumberdash/lumberdash.dart';
import 'package:movie_data/movie_data.dart';
import 'package:movies/firebase_options.dart';
import 'package:movies/main.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/screens/home/title_row.dart';
import 'package:movies/ui/widgets/movie_row.dart';
import 'package:movies/utils/utils.dart';
These will be the imports needed for the test.
4. Add the main function and the initialization (this looks just like the
main, except we are not using Crashlytics). Add the main function:
void main() async {
  final binding = 
IntegrationTestWidgetsFlutterBinding.ensureInitialized();
  binding.framePolicy = 
LiveTestWidgetsFlutterBindingFramePolicy.fullyLive;
  WidgetsFlutterBinding.ensureInitialized();
  putLumberdashToWork(withClients: [
    ColorizeLumberdash(),
  ]);
  await Firebase.initializeApp(
    options: DefaultFirebaseOptions.currentPlatform,
  );
  if (!isWeb()) {
    await dotenv.load(fileName: '.env');
  }
// TODO Add Test

--- Page 666 ---
}
This is the same code as in the main except for the first two lines.
5. Replace the TODO with the test:
  testWidgets('Test scrolling the Movie Listing', (tester) async {
    // Build our app and trigger a frame.
    await tester.pumpWidget(const ProviderScope(child: MainApp()));
  });
6. After the pumpWidget, add code to find the more button:
    await tester.pumpAndSettle(const Duration(seconds: 1));
    final moreButtonFinder = find.byType(TitleRow);
    expect(moreButtonFinder, findsAtLeast(1));
This waits for the app to load, finds the TitleRow, and asserts that at
least one was found.
7. Add the code to find the first More button and tap on it:
    final firstMoreButton = moreButtonFinder.first;
    final textButtonFinder = find.descendant(of: firstMoreButton, 
matching: find.byType(TextButton));
    await tester.tap(textButtonFinder);
    await tester.pumpAndSettle(const Duration(seconds: 1));
This finds the first More button (there are several) and then finds the
TextButton inside of it. It then taps on that button.
8. Open movie_listing.dart and add a scrolling controller. This is needed
for our test. After the _pagingController, add the following:
  final _scrollController = ScrollController();
9. Below the pagingController in the PagedListView, add the following:
     scrollController: _scrollController,
10. Back in movie_tests, find the Movie Listing (a PagedListView) and
get the paging and scrolling controllers:
    final movieListFinder = find.byType(PagedListView<int, 
MovieResults>);
    expect(movieListFinder, findsOneWidget);
    final movieList = tester.widget(movieListFinder);
    final pagingController = (movieList as 

--- Page 667 ---
PagedListView).pagingController;
    final controller = movieList.controller;
11. Next, get the first MovieRow and figure out its height and then what a
page of MovieRows heights are:
    final renderRow = tester.renderObject(find.byType(MovieRow).first) 
as RenderBox;
    final rowHeight = renderRow.size.height;
    final pageHeight = rowHeight * 20; // 20 items/page
    var currentPosition = pageHeight;
12. Scroll five times, and then make sure we have 120 items. (6x20)
    for (var i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
      controller?.jumpTo(
        currentPosition,
      );
      currentPosition += pageHeight;
      await tester.pumpAndSettle(const Duration(milliseconds: 500));
    }
    await tester.pumpAndSettle(const Duration(seconds: 1));
    expect(pagingController.itemList?.length, 120);
This uses the paging controllers itemList to check how many items
have been loaded.
13. Run the test and make sure it works.
Note: You may need to do flutter clean and flutter pub get commands to get the tests to work.
Performance
Now that you have your app written, it is time to think about performance.
How does it perform starting up? How much time does it take to transition to
other pages? Are certain actions taking too long? If your app is on the
market, are customers complaining about something taking too long? Flutter
itself is fast, drawing at 60 frames per second, but there are a number of
ways you can accidentally slow that down. Slow loading times,
unresponsiveness, and increased battery consumption will cause users to
abandon your app.

--- Page 668 ---
Widget tree
You can slow your screen down by having overly complex widget trees (the
set of widgets that make up your screen). You can also slow it down by not
breaking your screen into individual widgets. In other words, instead of one
long build method, breaking sections into their own widget class. This
causes Flutter to optimize drawing and not redraw widgets that do not need
to be drawn. If you have one long build method and you call setState, the
whole tree will need to be redrawn. Using large images can also slow things
down as well. Using stateless widgets is faster as well. Try and use them if
you do not have any state. Also, do not do any background tasks in the UI.
Minimize the use of clipping as that can affect rendering performance. Make
sure you follow the recommended lint warnings and make as many widgets
constant as possible.
DevTools
One of the best tools for measuring performance is Flutter’s DevTools. It
provides the following tools:
• Performance view: Timing and performance information.
• CPU profiler: Record and profile a session.
• Memory profiler: Analyze memory usage.
• Debugger: Set breakpoints, check the console, and call stack.
• Network: View network calls. Shows methods and duration.
• Logging: Shows logging information.
• App size: Analyze app snapshots.
You can access these tools from the right side of Android Studio, as shown
in the following figure:

--- Page 669 ---
Figure 18.2: Tools
This is a suite of developer tools as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 670 ---
Figure 18.3: Performance tools
This is the Performance tab. There are many things you can do on this page.
Pressing button number, one overlays the performance graph on the app.
Pressing number two brings up another dialog for adding more options:

--- Page 671 ---
Figure 18.4: Performance options
Pressing number three opens up options for rendering:
Figure 18.5: Rendering options
The next tab is the CPU Profiler:

--- Page 672 ---
Figure 18.6: CPU Profiler
Pressing the circled button will start recording. Once you press the button
again, it will show you details. This will show you the time and percentage
each task took. Most of these will be Flutter The next tab shows the memory
usage of all the classes. You can sort and filter to see how much memory
your classes are taking. As you can see here, images will usually take up
most of your memory. The CPU flame chart is a nice way to see:

--- Page 673 ---
Figure 18.7: Memory
Skipping the Debugger tab, we next have the Network tab. This shows all
of the API calls you make as well as calls to retrieve images and videos.

--- Page 674 ---
Figure 18.8: Networking
You can see the status of the network call (200 is a success), the type, and
the time it took to get the value. Here we have some images, and you can see
how long it took to download. Luckily, we use the CachedNetworkImage
package that will cache that image and not download it again.
Next is the Logging tab. The author prefers using Android Studio’s console
and using their own logging. This shows more system logs:

--- Page 675 ---
Figure 18.9: Logging
Take some time to get to know these tabs and see what you can learn about
the app.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have learned how to write three different kinds of tests.
Unit tests for business logic, widget tests for your individual widgets, and
integration tests for your full app. This will help you make sure your app

--- Page 676 ---
works the way it should and does not regress when you make changes.
Finally, you learned how to view the performance of your app and use the
tools Flutter provides to see what is happening with your app and where
there are performance bottlenecks. In the next chapter, you will learn how to
build and publish your app to the Google Play Store and the Apple App
Store.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 677 ---
CHAPTER 19
Building and Publishing
Introduction
In this chapter, you will learn how to build a release app for both Android
and iOS that you can then publish to both the Google Play Store and the
Apple App Store. This is a big step that involves learning about signing
apps, creating accounts on the different stores, and finally publishing your
apps. You will create developer accounts for both the Google Play Store and
the Apple App Store. This will allow you to publish your apps to the
respective stores. To create a polished app, you will need to create icons that
the user will see in the store and on their phones. This is the final step in
your journey to build mobile apps.
Structure
The chapter covers the following topics:
• Google developer account
• Apple developer account
• Icons
• Android release
• App store
• Play Store

--- Page 678 ---
Objectives
By the end of this chapter, you will have created developer accounts on each
platform, created release builds for both Android and iOS, created icons to
make a polished app and then finally published those apps on the Google
and Apple Stores. You should understand what is needed to publish your app
on both platforms.
Google developer account
To publish a release version for Android, you will need a developer account
on Google Play Store. The steps to create one are as follows:
1. Go to https://play.google.com/console/signup.
2. Sign in using your Google account.
3. On the next page, choose a type of account: Organization or Yourself:

--- Page 679 ---
Figure 19.1: Console signup
4. The next page shows the info on what you will need to create an
account:

--- Page 680 ---
Figure 19.2: Account creation info
5. Press Continue to follow the instructions to create your account.
This will get you started. In the Play Store section, you will learn how to
create a new app and publish your app.
Apple developer account
To start creating an Apple account, go to
https://developer.apple.com/programs/enroll/. Note that you will need to
pay $99/year for an account. The following is the start enrollment page:

--- Page 681 ---
Figure 19.3: Apple developer enrollment
The steps to create an account are as follows:
1. Click on Start your enrolment.
2. Click on the Create yours now link:

--- Page 682 ---
Figure 19.4: Apple sign-in
3. Fill out the form and finish creating your account:

--- Page 683 ---
Figure 19.5: Account creation
4. Return to the main page and click on Certificates:

--- Page 684 ---
Figure 19.6: Main page
5. Click on the blue plus button next to Certificates:


--- Page 685 ---
Figure 19.7: Certificates page
6. You will need to create both an Apple development certificate and an
Apple distribution certificate. Click on Apple Development and then
Continue.
Figure 19.8: New certificate
7. Before you do that, you will need to create a Request for Certificate.
You can do that by opening up the KeyChain access app on the Mac
and using the Certificate Assistant. Choose Request a Certificate
From a Certificate Authority:

--- Page 686 ---
Figure 19.9: Request New Certificate
8. Enter your email and name and choose Saved to disk:
Figure 19.10: Certificate Information
9. Click Continue and save the file in a known location. Return to the

--- Page 687 ---
developer webpage:
Figure 19.11: Create New Certificate
10. Click on Choose File and select the file you just created. Then click
Continue:
Figure 19.12: Download certificate
11. Download the certificate and double-click on it. The Mac should
install it in your Keychain Access app.


--- Page 688 ---
Figure 19.13: Keychain access
12. Do the same with the Distribution Certificate.
13. Go to your profile to view your Team ID.
14. Return to Xcode, open the Settings from the Xcode menu, and go to
the Accounts tab.
15. Login to your Apple account. Your screen will look something as
follows:
Figure 19.14: Accounts
This is where you can see your team and manage your certificates.
Icons
When you are ready to release your app, one of the most important aspects
of your app is how it looks. One of those areas is the icon from your app.
This is the image the user sees when they find your app in the app store and
click on it to start your app. You can have a designer create a custom icon,

--- Page 689 ---
find a website, or use AI image generation tools to create one. You can use
Google’s Imagen 3 to generate one, like the one below:
Figure 19.15: Icon image
We can use this image for both sets of icons. A good tool for creating icons
is Icon Maker Pro. You can get this on the Mac App Store. The following is
Icon Maker Pro with our new image dragged onto the image area:


--- Page 690 ---
Figure 19.16: Icon Maker Pro
Make sure you do not use Rounded Corner for iOS. For the following
platforms: Android, iOS and iPad platforms, press the Generate icons
button and save the files to a directory.
Android icons
Android icons go into the android/app/main/res/mipmap-xxxx folders,
where xxxx refers to each resolution that Android uses for its icons. Icon
Maker Pro creates individual files, with each file having the resolution type
at the end. You need to rename and move each file to the Android mipmap
folders:
1. In the Finder, rename each file to remove the resolution at the end so it
is just ic_launcher.png.
2. For each file, move it into the proper mipmap folder with that
resolution. Do this one file at a time.
3. Next, copy the higher-resolution file into the drawable folder.
4. In Android Studio, open launch_background.xml in the drawable
folder.
5. Change the code to point to this file:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!-- Modify this file to customize your launch splash screen -->
<layer-list 
xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android">
    <item>
        <bitmap
            android:gravity="center"
            android:src="@mipmap/ic_launcher" />
    </item>
</layer-list>
This file is referenced in the AndroidManifest.xml file and is used to
create the launcher icon.
6. Do the same for the launch_background.xml file in the drawable-v21
folder.

--- Page 691 ---
iOS icons
For iOS, the easiest way to change the icons is in Xcode. After creating the
icons in Icon Maker Pro, add the icons. The steps are as follows:
1. Select the Assets folder in Xcode.
Figure 19.17: Xcode assets
This is the default Flutter icon.
2. Drag each icon matching the size from the Finder. (It will tell you if you
put in the wrong size). icon-20.png goes to the first image and so on
until it looks like:

--- Page 692 ---
Figure 19.18: Final icons
Make sure you use the different iPad images created by Icon Maker Pro.
Android release
So far, in this book, we have been creating debug builds to test. In order to
submit your app to the Google Play Store and the Apple App Store, you need
to create a release version of your app. This version will be smaller, as all of
the debug information has been removed, and in many cases, the code has
been obfuscated to hide the code. Release builds are also signed so that users
can be assured that they are getting the app from the original developer. To
create a release app for Android, you will need to do a few extra steps. You
will need a keystore to store your cryptographic keys. This is a secure file
designed to protect sensitive information. To sign your app and submit it to
the Google Play Store, you will need to create this file and update the
build.gradle file. The steps are as follows:
1. In the terminal app, go to the Android folder of your project.
2. You should have the Android tools in your path (if not, type the full

--- Page 693 ---
path. If all else fails, Android Studio will have downloaded the Android
tools, and you can find that location in the Settings| Languages and
Frameworks | Android SDK panel). Type:
keytool -genkey -v -keystore movies-release.keystore -alias movies -
keyalg RSA -keysize 2048 -validity 10000
This will prompt you to enter information and will create the keystore
movies-release.keystore file. You need to fill in the information about
yourself and your company. Remember your passwords.
3. Open up the app/build.gradle file in Android Studio. After the
flutterVersionName definition add:
// Add the keystore information from the key.properties file
def keystoreProperties = new Properties()
def keystorePropertiesFile = rootProject.file('key.properties')
if (keystorePropertiesFile.exists()) {
    keystoreProperties.load(new 
FileInputStream(keystorePropertiesFile))
}
This looks for a file named key.properties to load in with passwords for
the keystore. This file should be added to the .gitignore and not checked
into Git.
4. Replace the buildTypes with:
    signingConfigs {
        release {
            if (keystorePropertiesFile.exists()) {
                keyAlias keystoreProperties['keyAlias']
                keyPassword keystoreProperties['keyPassword']
                storeFile keystoreProperties['storeFile'] ? 
file(keystoreProperties['storeFile']) : null
                storePassword keystoreProperties['storePassword']
            } else {
                println('Keystore file not found')
            }
        }

--- Page 694 ---
    }
     buildTypes {
        release {
            signingConfig signingConfigs.release
            minifyEnabled true // Enable code shrinking and obfuscation
            proguardFiles getDefaultProguardFile('proguard-android-
optimize.txt'), 'proguard-rules.pro'
        }
    }
This uses the definition of the keystore file to load the keystore
information.
5. Create a new file in the android folder named key.properties.
6. Add the following and add the password you used to create the keystore
file:
storeFile=../movies-release.keystore
storePassword=<your store password>
keyAlias=movies
keyPassword=<your key password>
To create an Android release, there are two different types of files that
can be generated: APK and a bundle file that ends with .aab. Google
recommends using bundle files so we will be doing that.
7. In the terminal, in the movies directory type:
flutter build appbundle ––release
This will create a file in the build/app/outputs/bundle/release folder.
App store
To publish your app to the app store, you will need your Apple Developer
account and will need to go to https://appstoreconnect.apple.com/ and log
in. You will see a page with links to different areas of the site. Find the
identifiers link:

--- Page 695 ---
Figure 19.19: App Store Connect
You need to create an identifier for your new app. The steps are as follows:
1. Click on the Identifiers link, as shown in the following figure:


--- Page 696 ---
Figure 19.20: Identifiers
2. Click on the blue plus image to create a new identifier:
Figure 19.21: App Id
3. Make sure App IDs are selected, and press Continue. This will register
your unique App ID:
Figure 19.22: Id type
4. Select App and press Continue:

--- Page 697 ---
Figure 19.23: Register Id
5. Enter a description and bundle ID, and press Continue:
Figure 19.24: Confirm register
6. Click Register.
7. Complete any other required settings. For example, there is a
requirement for the Digital Services Act Compliance. The dialog looks
as follows:

--- Page 698 ---
Figure 19.25: Digital Services Act
8. Create a new app. Find the blue plus button and press it to create a new
App:
Figure 19.26: New App
9. Fill in the information on the app:

--- Page 699 ---
Figure 19.27: New App information
10. Fill in the information and press Create.
iOS release build
To build an iOS release, you will need an Apple account. Like Android, you
can build the release from the command line like:
flutter build ipa ––release

--- Page 700 ---
This will create an ipa file in the build/ios/ipa folder. Here is how to build
from Xcode:
1. Open the project in Xcode.
2. Build a release build:
Figure 19.28: iOS Release build
This will take some time. Once it has finished, you will want to create
an archive. This is the final file that will be published in the store.
3. Create an archive by choosing Product | Archive. This will create an
iOS .ipa file:

--- Page 701 ---
Figure 19.29: Archives
4. Press Distribute App:
Figure 19.30: Distribute

--- Page 702 ---
5. Press Distribute to send the file to the App Store.
If everything works correctly, you will receive an email shortly that
mentions your app is in review. You will then need to wait for Apple to
approve. You will probably receive emails asking you to fix issues. This is
normal.
Play Store
At https://play.google.com/console, you will see something like the
following (minus existing apps). To publish your app on the Play Store, you
will need to create an app. The steps to do so are as follows:
1. Press the Create app link:
Figure 19.31: Console Home
2. Fill in the App details and press the Create App button:

--- Page 703 ---
Figure 19.32: Create app
3. You will be taken to the Dashboard. Click the View the tasks link:

--- Page 704 ---
Figure 19.33: Dashboard
4. You will see a long list of tasks that need to be addressed:

--- Page 705 ---
Figure 19.34: Tasks
5. Start with the privacy policy. You will need a URL to a valid privacy
policy. The author used the Termly website to create a privacy policy,
but you can use your own or find another website. It is then added to
their website. The following is the start of the Privacy Policy section:

--- Page 706 ---
Figure 19.35: Privacy Policy
6. Continue filling out all of the pages associated with the privacy policy.
7. Next, click on the App access section. Choose one of the options:
Figure 19.36: App access
8. Next, click on the Ads and answer any questions:

--- Page 707 ---
Figure 19.37: Ads
9. Next is Content ratings and filling out the questionnaire:
Figure 19.38: Content ratings
10. Next, fill out the Target audience and content section:

--- Page 708 ---
Figure 19.39: Target audience
11. Next is the simple News apps section:
Figure 19.40: News apps
12. Then, Data safety:

--- Page 709 ---
Figure 19.41: Data safety
13. Then Government apps:

--- Page 710 ---
Figure 19.42: Government apps
14. Financial features:

--- Page 711 ---
Figure 19.43: Financial features
15. Health:

--- Page 712 ---
Figure 19.44: Health
16. Next, fill out the Store settings app category and store listing details:

--- Page 713 ---
Figure 19.45: Store settings
17. Finally, fill out the store listing:

--- Page 714 ---
Figure 19.46: Store listing
18. Now, it is time to release your app. Return to the dashboard. You can
either create a release for testing or go straight to release. If you have
users that will test for you, it is recommended that you create a test
track. To create a new release, choose Create a new release:

--- Page 715 ---
Figure 19.47: Release your app
19. Set the app type and category:
Figure 19.48: App category
20. Fill out the store listing contact details:

--- Page 716 ---
Figure 19.49: store listing contact details
21. Select the countries and regions you want to release your app to:
Figure 19.50: Countries
22. Now, to create the release. Choose Create a new release:

--- Page 717 ---
Figure 19.51: Production release
23. Choose a signing key. It is recommended to let Google manage
signing. This helps so you do not have to keep track of the key yourself.
Enter the release details. Add as much detail to explain why the user
would want to update, as this is what the user will read on the Play
Store.
24. Click the Upload button and upload the .aab file you created earlier. If
everything goes well, you will have to wait for Google to review your

--- Page 718 ---
app and approve it.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you learned how to build a release app for both Android and
iOS that you could then publish to both the Google Play Store and the Apple
App Store. You now know what it takes to build and publish. This completes
your journey in creating and publishing your app. Congratulations! You have
learned a lot, and this should help you as you continue on in your
development career.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 719 ---
Index
A
AdaptiveScaffold 349
AdaptiveScaffold, points
AdaptiveLayout 351-354
Search Dialog 354-357
AdaptiveScaffold, steps 349-351
Android, architecture 513
Android Plugin, optimizing 449-452
Android, steps 513, 514
Android Studio 33
Android Studio, steps 33-39
Animations 192
Animations, libraries 212
Animations, packages 213
Animations, techniques
AnimatedBuilder 198
Animation 197
AnimationController 195, 196
Curves 197
Staggered Animation 198-202
Animations, types
Explicit 195
Implicit 192, 193
Animations, widgets 203, 204
Animations With Movie App, optimizing 213-216
API, process 271-274
API, sections 274
AppBar 53
Apple Account, steps 503-507
Application Programming Interface (API) 271
App Store, optimizing 514-517
Async/Await 223, 224
AutoRoute 164
AutoRoute, steps 164-168
B
BLoC 101
Bottom Navigation 160-162
BottomNavigationBar 53

--- Page 720 ---
BottomSheets 136, 137
Branches, keywords
If 16
Switch 16
Buttons 59
C
Canvas Class 210-212
Canvas Class, methods 210
Card 135
Chips 59
Chips, types 59
Class 20, 21
Cloud Firestore 416
Cloud Firestore, collections 416, 417
Color 78
Color, method 78
Column 54
Column, components 54
Column, parameters 55
Comments 19
Comments, types
Documentation 19
Imports 19, 20
Multi-Line 19
Single Line 19
Concurrency 25, 222
Concurrency, types
Async/Await 25
Streams 26
Constructor 21, 22
Container, widget 53, 54
Crashlytics 424
Crashlytics, steps 424
crossAxisAlignment 55
D
Dart 12
Dart Control, flow
Branches 16
Loops 17
Dart, functions 18
Dart Language, types
Booleans 13
Dynamic 13
Enum 13
Iterable 13

--- Page 721 ---
List 13
Maps 13
Never 13
Null 13
Numbers 12
Object 13
Sets 13
Strings 12
Void 13
Dart, parameters
Names 18
Optional 18
Plain 18
Dart, variables 13, 14
Databases 313
Databases, methods
MovieViewModel 397-400
Repository 391-395
Source 384-390
Databases, types
Drift 318
Floor 313-315
Hive 315
Isar 316, 317
SQLite 313
Data Models, process 268-271
DatePicker 60
Deep Link 152
Deep Link, categories
Android 189
iOS 189, 190
Deep Link, types
Android 153, 154
custom schemes 153
iOS 155-157
DevTools 494-500
Drawer 53
E
else 16
else if 16
Enums 24
Event Loop 224
Event Loop, types
lifecycle, events 224
system 224
user, interactions 224
Exception 26, 27

--- Page 722 ---
Expanded 127-129
Extension 24
F
Firebase 410
Firebase Authentication, steps 414, 415
Firebase Database, creating 418-421
Firebase Hosting 367
Firebase Hosting, setup 368-373
Firebase, installing steps 413, 414
Firebase Provider, process 422, 423
Firebase, services 425, 426
Firebase, setting up 410-412
Flutter
about 2
architecture 2-4
benefits 4
Dart Language, optimizing 4, 5
history 2
Flutter Animate 217
Flutter Animate, configuring 217, 218
Flutter Application, developing 6
Flutter, commands 30
Flutter Install, versions
CocoaPods 6
Flutter Doctor 6
macOS 5
Windows 5
Flutter Project, structures
Folders 52
Lib Folder 52
Lints 51
YAML 50
Flutter SDK, installing 5
FocusManager 377
FocusManager, methods 378
FocusNode 378
FocusNode, methods 378
FocusScope 378
FocusScope, methods 379
FutureBuilder 224
FutureBuilder, fields
connectionstate 224
data 224
error 224
FutureBuilder, steps 225-241
FutureBuilder, values 225
Futures 222

--- Page 723 ---
Futures, methods 222, 223
Futures, states 223
G
Genre Screen 105-108
Genre Screen, points
Genre Section 112-115
Movie List 120
Sorting 117, 118
Genre Screen, steps 109-111
GenreState 304
GenreState, process 304-312
GestureDetector 376, 377
GetIt 101
Google Fonts 79, 80
Google Fonts, steps 80-83
Google Play Store, steps 502, 503
GoRouter 162
GoRouter, steps 162-164
GridView 131
GridView, constructors 131
GridView, parameters 132
H
Hot Reload 41
I
Icons 58, 59, 510
Icons, types
Android 511
iOS 511, 512
Images 57
Images, parameters 57
Images, widgets 57
import keyword 19
IndexedStack 130
InheritedWidget 99
InkResponse 381
InkResponse, borders 381
Ink Widgets 380, 381
Integration Testing 490
Integration Testing, steps 490-493
iOS release, building 518-520
Isolates 254, 255
J

--- Page 724 ---
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) 264
JSON Code, generating 266, 267
JSON, data types 264
K
KeyboardListener 382
L
LayoutBuilder 130
ListView 126, 127
ListView, class 126
M
MacOS 338
MacOS, navigating 338-342
mapIndexed 120
MaterialApp 149
MaterialApp, methods 149
MaterialApp, parameters 149
Material Design 79
Material Theme Builder, steps 84-87
Menus 343
Menus, configuring 343-346
Menus, points
Desktop, visualizing 348
Platforms 347, 348
MethodChannel 444
Mixins 22, 23
MobX 102
Movie App 41
Movie App Architecture, types
Clean Architecture 44, 45
Folder Structure 46
SOLID 45
Movie App, building 64-74
Movie App, navigating 168-189
Movie App, preventing 46-48
Movie App, steps 41-43
Movie Link, listing 400-406
Movie List, steps 120-124
MyHomePage Widget 41
N
Named Routes 150
Navigation 146
Navigation, advantages 146

--- Page 725 ---
Navigation, disadvantages 146
Navigation, widget
MaterialApp 149
Navigator 146, 147
RouteInformationProvider 149
Router 147, 148
RouterDelegate 148
RouterInformationParser 148
Navigator 146
Navigator, methods
pop 147
push 147
pushNamed 147
Networking 258
Networking, interfaces 271
Null Safety 15
P
Packages 428
Packages Code, refactoring 430-432
Packages, creating 429
Packages, publishing 435
Packages, terms
Dart, publishing 438, 439
publisher, verifying 436, 437
Packages, types
Changelog.md 436
License File 436
pubspec.yaml 435
Readme.md 435
Platform Channels 444, 445
Play Store, steps 520-533
Plugin 442
Plugin, building 446
Plugin, concepts 475-477
Plugin, configuring 442-444
Plugin, files 456-460
Plugin, steps 446, 447
Plugin With iOS, analyzing 471-475
PodPlayerController 141
PodVideoPlayer 143
Provider 100
pubspec.yaml 50
pubspec.yaml, elements 50, 51
R
Radio Button 61

--- Page 726 ---
Redux, principles 101
Riverpod 102, 103
Riverpod, methods 103
Riverpod, packages 103
RouterDelegate 148
RouterDelegate, methods 148
RouterInformationParser 148
RouterInformationParser, methods 148, 149
Rows 55
S
Scaffold 52
Scaffold, parameters 52
Serialization 265
Serialization, methods 265
Serialization, parts 268
SharedPreferences 300
SharedPreferences, interactions 300-304
Slider 62
Slivers 137
Slivers, configuring 138-141
Slivers, types
SliverAppBar 137
SliverGrid 137
SliverList 137
SliverPadding 137
SliverToBoxAdapter 137
Snackbar 53
Stack 129, 130
State 98
State, classes
App State 98
Built-in State 98
Local State 98
Stateless/Stateful Widgets 40
State, packages
BLoC 101
Getlt 101
MobX 102
Provider 100
Redux 101
StreamBuilder 243
StreamBuilder, process 243-253
Streams 242, 243
Streams, ways 242
Switch 62
SystemChrome 143

--- Page 727 ---
T
Table 133, 134
Table, process 135
Testing 480
Testing, advantages 480
Testing, types
Integration 480
Unit 480
Widget 480
Testing, uses 480
Text 56
TextField 62, 379, 380
TextField, options 63, 64
Text Input 62, 63
Text, parameters 56, 57
Themes 83
Themes, parameters 83, 84
Themes, points
ColorScheme 84
iOS 90
Light/Dark, preventing 87
Material Theme Builder 84
Themes, steps 88, 89
TimePicker 62
TMDB 258-264
TMDB Configuration, steps 319, 320
TMDB, key points
Cleanup 333-336
Database, models 321-329
Images 320, 321
Movie View, model 330-332
TMDB, packages
API, security 274, 275
APIs, finalizing 295-297
Errors, fixing 278-280
Genres 297, 298
Home Screen, image 293-295
Logging 276
Trailers, cast 287-291
Trend Movies 275, 276
ViewModel 277
Typography 79
U
Unit Testing 481
Unit Testing, points
Groups 484-486

--- Page 728 ---
MoviePlugin 481-483
User Input/Event, handling 376
V
var 12
Visual Studio Code 7, 31
Visual Studio Code, steps 31, 32
W
Web 362
Web, steps 362-364
Web, ways
CanvasKit 362
HTML 362
WebAssembly 362
Widgets 40
WidgetTester 487
WidgetTester, configuring 487, 488
WidgetTester, methods 487
WidgetTester, steps 488-490
Widget Tree 493
X
Xcode Installing, steps 7-9
Xcode, process 90-93
Xcode, simulating 94-96
OceanofPDF.com