--- Page 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
Table of Contents
Preface
Chapter 1: Exploring the Fundamentals of SwiftUI
Chapter 2: Understanding Animation with SwiftUI
Chapter 3: Creating a Breathing App
Chapter 4: Building a Record Player
Chapter 5: Animating Colorful Kaleidoscope Effects
Chapter 6: Animating a Girl on a Swing
Chapter 7: Building a Series of Belts and Gears
Chapter 8: Animating a Bouquet of Flowers
Chapter 9: Animating Strokes around Shapes
Chapter 10: Creating an Ocean Scene
Chapter 11: Animating an Elevator
Chapter 12: Creating a Word Game (Part 1)
Chapter 13: Creating a Word Game (Part 2)
Chapter 14: Creating a Color Game
Chapter 15: Integrating SpriteKit into Your SwiftUI Projects
Index
Other Books You May Enjoy

--- Page 4 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 5 ---
Preface
Welcome to Animating SwiftUI Applications, a book designed to help you
create engaging and interactive user experiences using SwiftUI animations.
SwiftUI is a modern, declarative, and intuitive framework for building user
interfaces on Apple platforms, and it comes with a powerful and easy-to-use
animation system that lets you add motion and life to your apps effortlessly.
With SwiftUI animations, you can add dynamic transitions, smooth
movements, and delightful effects to your app’s UI elements, making them
more engaging and intuitive for users. You can animate anything from
simple buttons and text fields to complex layouts and custom shapes, all
with just a few lines of code.
In this book, you will learn how to use SwiftUI animations to create various
types of effects, including transitions, gestures, and even SpriteKit
animations. You’ll explore different animation techniques, such as implicit,
explicit, and combined animations, and learn how to apply them to create
stunning and responsive user interfaces. By the end of the book, you’ll be
able to create beautiful and engaging animations and apps that really stand
out from the crowd.

--- Page 6 ---
Who this book is for
This book is aimed at those who have a basic working knowledge of Swift
but are a beginner when it comes to SwiftUI. The book starts with some
basics of the SwiftUI framework, and then proceeds with simple animation
examples, before moving on to more advanced topics.

--- Page 7 ---
What this book covers
In Chapter 1, Exploring the Fundamentals of SwiftUI, you will receive a
comprehensive overview of the two distinct programming styles:
imperative and declarative. Then, we will delve into the Xcode interface,
the free application provided by Apple, where all our development work
will take place. Finally, we will examine the fundamental SwiftUI
structures required for creating applications, laying the groundwork for
advancing with animations.
In Chapter 2, Understanding Animation in SwiftUI, we will examine the
mechanics of animations, covering essential topics such as timing curves
and animatable properties. This will establish a solid foundation for the
projects we will construct.
In Chapter 3, Creating a Breathing App, we will harness the power of
SwiftUI’s user-friendly modifiers and design tools to effortlessly rotate,
scale, and move views. Moreover, we will utilize the animation modifier to
smoothly interpolate between start and end values, producing a seamless
animation.
In Chapter 4, Building a Record Player, we will incorporate images from
the Asset Catalog into our code. Then, we will create standalone files for
creating various views that can be seamlessly integrated into the main view
for display. Furthermore, we will add a button to trigger the animation and
incorporate sound into the project.
In Chapter 5, Animating Colorful Kaleidoscope Effects, we will explore the
animation of colors using the hueRotation modifier, where hue pertains to
the colors of the object and rotation signifies the rotation or animation of
these colors. We will construct a straightforward project that showcases
various images, and then utilize hueRotation to alter the color of the
images, producing a kaleidoscope-like effect.
In Chapter 6, Animating a Girl on a Swing, we will investigate the process
of cutting up images into separate parts, and then using code to animate

--- Page 8 ---
these separate parts together in creative and unique ways. Additionally, we
will utilize a new modifier, mask, to help disguise and hide specific areas of
our animation that we don’t want to see.
In Chapter 7, Building a Series of Belts and Gears, we will generate a
“marching ants” effect by employing the stroke modifier, and then
examine how to neatly organize code using Pragma Marks and Groups. We
will also animate objects along all three axes, x, y, and z, by utilizing the
rotation3Deffect modifier.
In Chapter 8, Animating a Flower, we will construct the illusion of a
bouquet of flowers breathing through the use of modifiers such as blur,
scale, and rotationEffect. Additionally, we will examine the
UIViewRepresentable protocol and the CAEmitter class to incorporate
falling snow into the scene.
In Chapter 9, Animating Strokes around Shapes, we will delve into the
process of converting bitmap images into vector files, and then transform
these vector files into code that we can utilize in a SwiftUI project.
Furthermore, we will animate a stroke around various shapes through the
use of the stroke modifier and timers.
In Chapter 10, Creating an Ocean Scene, we will utilize the Shape protocol
to craft an oceanic scene featuring undulating waves, a buoy that bobs in
the water, a flashing light, and accompanying sounds.
In Chapter 11, Animating an Elevator, we will employ GeometryReader and
the proxy constant to insert images into the project and position them
appropriately. This will enable the images to be dynamically resized based
on the device in use. Furthermore, we will create a DataModel to store the
app’s data and functions and make use of timers to activate doors and light
animations at various points in the scene.
In Chapter 12, Creating a Word Game – Part 1, we will commence with the
construction of a word-based game that allows players to input words to
play using three different languages, with validations in place to verify their
choices.

--- Page 9 ---
In Chapter 13, Creating a Word Game – Part 2, we will add the finishing
touches to our word game by organizing its properties and functions within
DataModel and creating distinct header and footer views to display
information to the user. Additionally, we will incorporate user feedback in
three different forms: pop-up alerts, haptic feedback, and audio.
In Chapter 14, Creating a Color Game, we will develop an RGB color-
matching game that keeps track of the score and displays a celebratory
confetti animation upon the player achieving a perfect score. We will also
examine the integration of Swift packages into the project.
In Chapter 15, Integrating SpriteKit into your SwiftUI Projects, we will
create six separate projects that showcase SpriteKit and a variety of particle
systems. We will learn how to blend realistic and fluid animations
seamlessly with your SwiftUI code.
To get the most out of this book
To get the most out of this book, a working knowledge of the Swift
programming language is required. Knowledge of the fundamentals of
SwiftUI is helpful, but not required.
You will also need a Mac computer and have downloaded the free software,
Xcode (Xcode runs well on most versions of macOS, so it should work with
the version you have).
We will build our projects for iOS devices.
If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type
the code yourself or access the code from the book’s GitHub repository
(a link is available in the next section). Doing so will help you avoid any
potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.
If you prefer to learn through video tutorials, I recommend my Swift and
SwiftUI courses over at udemy.com. Other highly recommended resources
that can help to build your coding skills fast are Paul Hudson’s works at
hackingwithswift.com, and J.D. Gauchat’s SwiftUI for Masterminds book.

--- Page 10 ---
Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-Applications. If
there’s an update to the code, it will be updated in the GitHub repository.
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos
available at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!
Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots and
diagrams used in this book. You can download it here:
https://packt.link/O1ZYe.
Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder
names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input,
and Twitter handles. Here is an example: “He is very thorough as well, and
you can find his work at jdgauchat.com.”
A block of code is set as follows:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        HStack {
            Text(“Hello”)
            Spacer()
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block,
the relevant lines or items are set in bold:

--- Page 11 ---
struct ContentView: View {
   var body: some View {
       VStack(alignment: .leading)  {
      Text(“Hi, I’m child one in this vertical stack”)
      Text(“Hi, I’m child two in this vertical stack”)
Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see
onscreen. For instance, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold.
Here is an example: “We will be using the first option, which is Create a
new Xcode project, for all of our projects, so select that.”
Tips or important notes
Appear like this.
Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book,
email us at customercare@packtpub.com and mention the book title in the
subject of your message.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we
would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please visit
www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on
the internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location
address or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a
link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you
have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a
book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.

--- Page 12 ---
Share Your Thoughts
Once you’ve read Animating SwiftUI Applications, we’d love to hear your
thoughts! Please click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for
this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us
make sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.
Download a free PDF copy of this
book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books
everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version
of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code
from your favorite technical books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts,
newsletters, and great free content in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below

--- Page 13 ---
https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781803232669
2. Submit your proof of purchase
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email
directly
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 14 ---
Exploring the Fundamentals of
SwiftUI
Welcome to Animating SwiftUI Applications! If you picked up this book,
then there’s a good chance you are a developer – or aspiring to be one – and
you want to learn more about SwiftUI animations. Or maybe you’re
fascinated by animations and how they work like I am. I know for me that
the first time I played a video game (before the home computer was even
available) and saw objects collide and bounce off each other on the screen, I
was hooked by animations and the code behind how they worked. Whatever
the reason you’re here though, together we will explore the amazing things
we can make happen on an Apple device by leveraging the power of
SwiftUI’s animation classes, methods, and properties.
This chapter starts with a brief look at the two programming styles,
imperative and declarative, and will give you an idea of why Apple
introduced the declarative SwiftUI way of coding to the development
world. Then, we’ll explore the Xcode interface, the free application from
Apple, where we do all of our work. Finally, we’ll look at the SwiftUI
structures needed to develop apps, which is the foundation for proceeding
further with animations.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Understanding imperative and declarative programming
Exploring the Xcode interface
Understanding the state
Understanding SwiftUI structures

--- Page 15 ---
Technical requirements
In order to write code that can run on Apple devices, first, we need an Apple
computer. This can be any of their models, but the MacBook Pro is the most
popular for coding because of its power and speed.
Once we have the hardware, then the next bit of tech we need to write code
is the software. Apple has put together a very comprehensive set of tools all
bundled into one program called Xcode, which is free to download from the
App Store. Those two things are everything you need to start writing code
on Apple, but if you want to upload your finished app to the App Store, then
you will need an Apple Developer account. This currently costs $99 a year
to maintain, but it is necessary to be able to sell your apps to the world. Go
to developer.apple.com and sign up for an account there.
You should also have a working knowledge of the Swift programming
language so that you feel comfortable writing code, but you don’t have to
be an expert by any means; it’s just that it is very helpful if you understand,
or at least recognize, the syntax of the Swift language and the fundamentals
of object-oriented programming (OOP) so that you can follow along with
the projects better.
With that said, if you are a complete beginner to writing code, you might be
a bit confused here – but not to worry, when Apple introduced the Swift
programming language in 2014, they held fast to their goal of making one
of the easiest-to-pick-up and most user-friendly programming languages to
date. And for the most part, the Swift language reads like English sentences,
so you can progress very quickly.
Here is what I recommend when you’re just starting out learning Swift:
Start with the Swift tutorials offered by Paul Hudson. He is a brilliant Swift
programmer, and one of the most prolific in the industry. He has put
together tons of free Swift training tutorials and videos that get you to write
code fast. I have worked with Paul on many projects, and you would be
hard-pressed to find a better and more thorough teaching style – he’s also
just an all-around nice guy. Check out all his stuff at hackingwithswift.com.

--- Page 16 ---
Someone else I have worked with (and continue to work with) is John D.
Gauchat. He has put together a Swift and SwiftUI Mastermind series of
books that can serve as both a reference and a guide/cookbook of code for
when you need to remember the syntax or how to implement something
fast. He is very thorough as well, and you can find his work at
jdgauchat.com.
Finally, if you like structured video courses, I have translated many of
Paul’s and John’s Swift and SwiftUI books into video courses, and they are
available over at udemy.com – just search for my name to see them all,
including the video version of this book (which includes extra projects).
OK, that’s enough of those shameful plugs, but if you are a complete
beginner, I want you to learn the Swift programming language from the
very best, and those two guys are; this way, you will be ready to follow
along and code in no time. So, go get some Swift knowledge under your
belt, and come back here. I’ll wait…
Finally, to access all of the code in this book, go to the following GitHub
repository: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
Understanding imperative and
declarative programming
SwiftUI is a fairly new framework introduced by Apple in 2019 that
includes intuitive new design tools that help make building great-looking
interfaces almost as easy as dragging and dropping… almost. With its
modular approach, it’s estimated that you can build the same projects
previously built in Xcode using about five times less code. Also, SwiftUI
was Apple’s solution for building apps that can easily be used on all of their
other platforms – so, an app can be built once, and it will perform perfectly
on iOS, tvOS, macOS, and watchOS.
The SwiftUI interface, which we will cover shortly, uses editor and canvas
preview windows that work in tandem. As you code in the Xcode editor, the

--- Page 17 ---
new design canvas displays everything completely in sync and renders in
real time as you type. So, any change you make in the editor is immediately
reflected in the canvas preview, and vice versa.
I mentioned the ease of drag and dropping in code earlier; this is because
those nice engineers at Apple must have spent countless nights working
hard putting together a huge selection of pre-made chunks of code called
views and modifiers that you can drag and drop right into the editor. This
includes things such as buttons, labels, menus, lists, pickers, forms, text
fields, toggle switches, modifiers, events, navigation objects, effects, and
well, much more, but you get the point. Unlike UIKit and Storyboards,
when you drop a view or a modifier into the editor or on the canvas,
SwiftUI generates the code for that view automatically.
The SwiftUI approach to app development is known as declarative
programming, and it has become widely popular in the last few years.
Examples of declarative programming would include frameworks such as
React and cross-platform development frameworks such as React Native
and Flutter. So, now it’s Apple’s turn to offer its own completely native
declarative UI framework, SwiftUI.
But what does declarative programming actually mean? Well, to best
describe declarative programming, let’s first understand what imperative
programming is.
Imperative programming has been the oldest programming paradigm
since the dawn of computer languages. The word “imperative” has its origin
in the Latin word “imperare”, which means “to command,” and it was first
used to express a command – for example: “do it”! (Hmm, I wonder
whether Nike borrowed that imperative command and tweaked it a little…)
This style of programming is what iOS developers used before SwiftUI
came out.
Imperative programming is a programming paradigm that uses statements
that change a program’s state. These statements are executed in a specific
order, and they usually involve assignment statements, loops, and control
structures that specify how the computation should be carried out.

--- Page 18 ---
In imperative programming, the programmer specifies exactly how the
computation should be carried out, using statements that tell the computer
what to do. This can make imperative programs more complex because the
programmer has to specify all of the steps of computation. However, it can
also make them more flexible because the programmer has more control
over the details of the computation.
Here is an example of imperative programming using the UIKit framework
in iOS:
let button = UIButton(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 100, 
height: 50))
button.setTitle("Button", for: .normal)
button.setTitleColor(.black, for: .normal)
button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(buttonTapped), for: 
.touchUpInside)
view.addSubview(button)
This code creates a new UIButton, sets its title and title color, and adds an
action to be performed when the button is tapped. It then adds the button to
the view hierarchy. This code is imperative because it specifies the exact
steps needed to create and configure the button and add it to the view.
Now, this same code could also be written in a declarative style using a
library such as SwiftUI, ReactiveCocoa, or RxSwift, which allows you to
specify the desired behavior of the button rather than the steps needed to
achieve it. Here is the same example written using SwiftUI:
import SwiftUI
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        Button(action: {
            // action to be performed when button is tapped
        }) {
            Text("Button")
                .font(.title)
                .foregroundColor(.black)
        }
    }
}

--- Page 19 ---
In this example, the Button view is declarative, because it specifies the
desired behavior of the button (displaying text and performing an action
when tapped), rather than the steps needed to create and configure the
button.
SwiftUI uses a declarative style of programming, which can make it easier
to understand and maintain your code because you don’t have to specify all
of the intermediate steps needed to achieve the desired behavior. It also
allows your code to automatically update when the underlying data changes
because you specify the desired outcome rather than the steps needed to
achieve it.
So, declarative programming is a programming paradigm in which a
program specifies what it wants to achieve, rather than how to achieve it.
The focus is on the “what” rather than the “how.” Declarative programs are
usually easier to understand because they don’t require the programmer to
specify every single step of the computation. They can also be more concise
because they don’t need to specify all of the intermediate steps.
There are many different programming languages and technologies that
support declarative programming, including SQL, HTML, and functional
programming languages such as Haskell and Lisp. In general, declarative
programming is well suited to tasks that involve defining data relationships
or specifying a desired output, rather than specifying the steps needed to
achieve something.
To clarify, let’s use the analogy of an artist: imperative languages paint by
numbers to reach the desired result, a finished painting, but declarative
languages use the finished painting and let background algorithms
(functions and methods) automatically choose the appropriate colors and
brush strokes to achieve the desired result. Also, by using this declarative
approach, SwiftUI minimizes or eliminates programming side effects,
usually caused by tracking the state of the program.
Note
You will want to keep in mind that in many cases, code will be a mixture of
both imperative and declarative styles, so it’s not always one or the other.

--- Page 20 ---
With a better understanding of SwiftUI now, we will proceed to an
overview of the Xcode interface.
Exploring the Xcode interface
In this section, we will take a tour of the Xcode interface. I’m assuming that
you have used Xcode before, practicing your Swift skills, which means you
have a good handle on many of the things here in the interface. However,
there are a few new additions to accommodate SwiftUI.
When you first start up Xcode, you see the welcome screen. On the right is
a list of recent projects, and on the left, there are buttons to start a new
project, open an existing project, or clone one saved in a repository.
Figure 1.1: Xcode welcome screen
We will be using the first option, which is Create a new Xcode project, for
all of our projects, so select that.

--- Page 21 ---
The next screen lets us choose options for the project:
Figure 1.2: Project options
Let’s look at these options:
Note
Product Name: This will be the name of the project. You should select
a name that is directly related to what the project will do.
Team: This will be the developer account you created with your Apple
ID at developer.apple.com, or a company account if you have one.
Organization Identifier: Xcode will take this value and add it to the
project’s name to create a unique bundle identifier for your app. It is
recommended to write the identifier out with an inverted domain, as I
did in the example (com.SMDAppTech).

--- Page 22 ---
If you were wondering why Apple requires this reverse notion, here’s a
deeper explanation. Reverse domain name notation (or reverse DNS) is a
system used to map an IP address to a domain name. Reverse DNS strings
are based on registered domain names, with the order of the components
reversed for grouping purposes. Here is an example: if a company making a
product called MyProduct has the domain name exampleDomain.com, they
could use a reverse DNS string of com.exampleDomain.MyProduct as an
identifier for that product. Reverse DNS names are a simple way of
eliminating namespace collisions since any domain name is globally unique
to its registered owner.
A quick note: even though we drag and drop onto the storyboard in that
option, the code is not generated after you drop an object onto the board.
You still have to write out the code for each object and make connections
for buttons and other controls. Whereas in SwiftUI, you can drag and drop
similar components, and the code is automatically propagated in the editor
for you. You then fill out the body with what you want it to do.
When we hit Next, we’re asked where to save the project. I like to save it
on the desktop, but you can choose any location you want.
And now we are in the Xcode interface:
Interface: This is where we select the technology we will use to
design the UI. From the drop-down list, you can choose SwiftUI or
Storyboard. SwiftUI is a system that lets us declare the interface from
code, while Storyboard is a graphical system that allows us to drag and
drop many components and controls onto a storyboard to create the user
interface – we want to select SwiftUI.
Language: This is the coding language; here, we will select Swift.
We don’t need to use core data, which is a way of persisting your data
so it always loads back up again, and we don’t need to include tests for
any of the projects.

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 1.3: Xcode interface
The Xcode interface is the part of Xcode where we do all of our coding. It
is split up into different sections; here are those sections explained:
This is a collapsible space that contains all the project files. A file called
ContentView is here, into which we can write our code, and we can create
more files as the project grows. If you have worked in Xcode before with
UIKit, then the ContentView file is analogous to UIKit’s View Controller,
where it had the ViewDidLoad method, in which we would usually load
some user interface code. Here, we put the UI code in the ContentView
struct and create other structs as needed. We can also organize all these files
by creating and naming new groups and folders. There’s another file here
called Assets.xcassets (also called the Assets catalog), where we place
the images and colors needed for our project.
Project Navigator (1):

--- Page 24 ---
Looking at the top of the Project Navigator section, you’ll see a blue icon,
followed by the name of your project; here, it’s Demo. This is the main
folder of your project into which everything else is placed, including the
new Swift files that you create. Clicking on that takes us to many different
options and settings to configure the app, things such as the deployment
target, signing, capabilities, build settings, and more.
Let’s look at the toolbar (after the traffic light buttons), starting from left to
right:
Tool bar (2):
There is a navigator toggle button that opens and closes the Project
Navigator pane that we just looked at, to give you more working space
when you need it.
To the right of the navigation button is a play button that runs and
stops the project.
Next, you will see the title of your project. However, if you click on it,
this is a drop-down list, allowing you to select the scheme and various
different simulators or devices to run your project in. A scheme is a
destination for running the app. For example, Xcode lets us run the
project on different simulators, on a device, in a window on the Mac
computer, on an Apple watch, on an iPad, or on an Apple TV if we are
building for those. We are building for the iPhone, so you can select any
of the iPhone simulator models from the list, or connect your iPhone to
your computer and you will see it appear in the list. If you select your
iPhone, you can see what your app looks like running on an actual
device.
After that, there is a display area to show any errors or warnings, as
well as the app’s current status.
To the right on the toolbar is a plus button that opens up a library of
tools that we use to help create the user interface, things such as
modifiers, views, controls, and code snippets.

--- Page 25 ---
The Utilities Inspector is a collapsible area that offers more options to edit
and configure the interface and its elements. There are five tabs at the top
for this; from left to right, they are as follows:
This is a collapsible space that appears and disappears by toggling the
button on the bottom right. The area can also be divided into two sections.
When split, the section on the left provides information for debugging, and
the right is a console used to display any relevant information when we run
the code, as well as warnings and errors.
And finally, there's another button at the far right to show or collapse
the Utilities Inspector, again, for more screen real estate when needed.
Utilities (3):
File Inspector is used to adjust the parameters for the file you are
working in
History Inspector is used to view your project’s history (this is not
used much in a SwiftUI project)
Quick Help Inspector will give you a description/definition of the
code selected in the editor
Accessibility Inspector is for configuring things such as voiceover,
Braille reading, and other settings related to making your app more
accessible
Attributes Inspector gives you the option to change any of the
attributes of a particular view, modifier, or other control that you have
selected
Debug/Console (4):
Editor (5):

--- Page 26 ---
This is the area in which we write our code. This section of Xcode is not
collapsible, but we can split it into two or more sections by clicking the
button at the far right just underneath the toolbar. It can be positioned at the
top or the bottom depending on how you like to write code.
There is also a feature called the mini-map, a miniature map of the code
file, which offers a helpful view of the entire file, and makes it easy to
reference and navigate around your code, especially if you have very large
files. We can enable it by clicking on the little hamburger icon at the top
right and choosing Mini Map.
The canvas is its own collapsible section of Xcode that features a graphical
simulator called a preview, that has a real-time connection to the code
within the editor. Any changes we make in the editor will be reflected in the
preview. There is a Run button on the preview to test out what you’ve done
so far, but the preview is a great visual aid that helps speed up development.
That’s the XCode interface in a nutshell. It may look daunting at first, but as
you code along through the projects, you will become more comfortable
and start to learn where everything is.
Let’s continue and look at the concept of the state, which is data that can
change. We hold our data in variables, and that data changes many times
when we animate something in SwiftUI; when the data changes, SwiftUI
helpfully will handle updating the animations for us by using the state to
refresh the views.
Understanding the state
In SwiftUI, a state is a piece of data that can change. When the state
changes, the view that depends on the state is automatically refreshed.
You can declare a state in a SwiftUI view by using the @State property
wrapper. For example, see the following:
Canvas Previews (6):

--- Page 27 ---
struct ContentView: View {
    @State private var name: String = "Bella"
}
Here, name is a state that is stored as a string. You can then use this state to
display dynamic content in your view:
struct ContentView: View {
    @State private var name: String = "Bella"
    var body: some View {
        Text("Hello, \(name)")
    }
}
To change the state, we can assign a new value to the @State property. For
example, see the following:
struct ContentView: View {
    @State private var name: String = "Bella"
        var body: some View {
        VStack {
            Text("Hello, \(name)")
            Button(action: {
                name = "Jack"
            }) {
                Text("Change name")
            }
        }
    }
}
When the button is tapped, the name state is changed to "Jack" and the
view is automatically refreshed to display the new name.
Let’s continue now and look at what makes up SwiftUI and helps it works
so well.

--- Page 28 ---
Understanding SwiftUI structures
SwiftUI gives us views, controls, modifiers, and layout structures for
declaring the user interface. The framework also includes event handlers for
providing taps, gestures, and other kinds of input for our app, as well as
tools for managing the flow of data coming from your app’s models.
But what’s a model? A model is simply a folder we create in the Project
Navigator window where we usually keep the app’s data; for example, if
we are working on a weather app, we can keep our wind, temperature,
precipitation, and snow accumulation data in the app’s model after it has
been received from the internet through an Application Programming
Interface (API) call, which is prebuilt software that talks to other programs
for us. That data will then be processed and sent down to the views and
controls that the user will see and can interact with.
SwiftUI allows us to avoid using Interface Builder and Storyboards to
design the app’s user interface, as we can use the preview canvas and the
editor instead. We can inspect the user interface as we write code, and also
generate code when dragging and dropping views/controls into the canvas.
The code within the editor and the canvas preview are side by side;
changing one will update the other.
When building our apps, we use views. Nearly everything is a view in
SwiftUI, and they are the building blocks of our apps, things such as text
boxes, buttons, toggles, pickers, shapes, colors (yes, even colors are a
view), stacks, and more. We add them to the canvas by dragging them out
of the view’s library, or by typing out the code in the editor, and then setting
their properties with modifiers. Each view will have its own unique set of
properties and modifiers, and many views will also share those same
properties and modifiers too.
The following are the SwiftUI structures we will look at so you can get a
good foundation for completing this book’s projects:
Computed properties

--- Page 29 ---
Let’s go through each of these now.
Computed properties
One of the first things we will look at is computed properties because that
is how views are made. Here is a look at the template code that we see
when we first create a new SwiftUI project:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            Image(systemName: "globe")
                .imageScale(.large)
                .foregroundColor(.accentColor)
            Text("Hello, world!")
        }
        .padding()
    }
}
If we run that code, this is what we see in the preview window:
Stacks (VStack, HStack, and ZStack)
The Spacer view
The Divider view
The padding modifier
Closures
GeometryReader

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 1.4: Running the template code
The Hello, world! string is displayed in the middle of the screen.
Looking at the code, we see that it includes a struct object called
ContentView, which is the basic building block struct that SwiftUI creates
for us. Inside that is a computed property called body – it has open and
close parentheses, and yes, it has a body where you place your code to be
executed, as does any function in Swift. Computed properties do not store
values as a regular stored property or variable would. Instead, this property
will compute the code you place in between the parentheses and then return
the result.
Computed properties can have getters and or setters. They can either get
and return a value, set a new value, or do both. However, if it just has a
getter, then it’s known as a read-only property because it will only return
the computed properties value.
You might be wondering if this is a computed read-only property, where are
the getter and return keywords? Well, this code is actually the shorthand
version of a computed property. It’s optional to write out the longhand
version, but we could if we wanted more readable and descriptive code; if
we did, it would look like this:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        get {
            return VStack {
                Image(systemName: "globe")
                    .imageScale(.large)
                    .foregroundColor(.accentColor)
                Text("Hello, world!")
            }
            .padding()
        }
    }
}
This code does the same thing as before: it returns the Hello World! text
view, and the image view, but I’ve just added the two keywords, get and

--- Page 32 ---
return. Again, they are optional, so you will see the shorthand version in
most cases, because less code is, well, less code, which makes life easier.
Still, many developers prefer the clarity of adding those keywords... it’s up
to you.
There’s another curious bit of syntax here and that’s the some View
keyword. The some keyword indicates that an opaque type will be returned,
and View is the opaque type in this instance. Opaque refers to something
that’s not clear or not easily understood. So, what’s not clear? That would
be the type that this view will return. That’s because, being an opaque type,
it hides the type and its implementation from us. All it cares about is that a
single view will be returned, which is important because only one view can
be returned to satisfy the some keyword’s requirements. The view’s type
that will be returned is determined by what we put into the body of the
computed property. In the code, there is a Text view there, so that’s the type
that is returned.
When we create custom views, we just have to make sure that it conforms
to the View protocol. To do that, we just need to implement the required
body computed property, then we can add whatever view we want to
display, things such as buttons, toggles, pickers, shapes, colors, and so on,
but again, just one view.
Another bit of syntax to look at is .padding(), called a layout modifier – it
modifies the layout of the text view by placing 20 points of padding (that’s
the default amount when we don’t choose a value) all around the text view.
Many different modifiers are grouped into different categories, such as text
modifiers, image modifiers, list modifiers, and more.
Have a play around and experiment with them by clicking on the plus
button on the top right in Xcode and then selecting the Modifiers tab. You
will quickly get to know the many different modifiers as you start building
the projects.
Let’s now turn our attention to the organizational layout of these views on
the screen.

--- Page 33 ---
Stacks
Remember I said that the some View protocol has one requirement, and that
is to return just one view when we run the code. That’s fine in very simple
apps, but more often than not, we need to return more than one view –
several views might need to be displayed on the screen for the user to
interact with in fact, such as a button, a text field, some images, text, and so
on. We need to organize these views vertically and horizontally on the
screen, as well as on the z-axis (placing views on top of each other).
To achieve this, SwiftUI gives us vertical, horizontal, and zed stacks, or
VStack, HStack, and ZStack for short. These are container views that can
hold 10 views inside them. The views inside them are know as child views.
Let’s look at each now.
VStack
A VStack is simply a container view that arranges its children in a vertical
line. Looking at the previous code, when we press the Run button, one
view is returned, the Text view, and it displays Hello World! on the user’s
screen.
But what if we want to have more than one view returned from inside the
body computed property? Maybe we want to have a Button and a Text
view on the screen, as in this code example:
struct ContentView: View {
    @State var myText = ""
    @State var changeText = false
    var body: some View {
        Text(myText)
            .padding()
        Button("Button") {
            changeText.toggle()
            if changeText {
                myText = "Hello SwiftUI!"
            } else {
                myText = "Hello World!"

--- Page 34 ---
            }
        }
    }
}
If we press Command + B to build this code, it builds cleanly and error-free.
But even though this code is error-free, nothing appears in the previews, so
it won’t do anything when we press the play button to run it. The code
won’t do anything because there are two views inside the body computed
property: a Text view and a Button view. This violates the View protocol,
which only wants some View returned (singular), not some Views (plural).
Now, look at the same code with a minor change made to it:
struct ContentView: View {
    @State var myText = ""
    @State var changeText = false
    
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            Text(myText)
                .padding()
          Button("Button") {
                changeText.toggle()
                if changeText {
                    myText = "Hello SwiftUI!"
                } else {
                    myText = "Hello World!"
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
I have put all of the code inside the VStack. Now, when we run it,
everything works as expected, and the two views can coexist inside the
body computed property without any issues. If we press the button, the text
will change depending on the value in the changeText property:

--- Page 35 ---
Figure 1.5: VStack

--- Page 36 ---
The VStack can hold 10 child views and is still considered to only return
one view itself, so the some View protocol is satisfied. If you need more
than 10 children, you can nest VStacks inside each other to add even more
views.
The VStack, as you might imagine, will stack all of its children vertically,
but you can also set an optional alignment and spacing within the VStack
initializer too.
Alignment
By default, everything in the VStack is center-aligned, but if you want all of
its child views aligned to the leading edge or trailing edge, you can use the
alignment parameter like this:
struct ContentView: View {
   var body: some View {
        VStack(alignment: .leading) {
      Text("Hi, I'm child one in this vertical stack")
      Text("Hi, I'm child two in this vertical stack")
      Text("Hi, I'm child three in this vertical stack")
      Text("Hi, I'm child four in this vertical stack, I'm 
the         best")
        }
    }}
All the child views are now aligned to the leading edge within the VStack:

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 1.6: Leading alignment
You can also align the views to the trailing edge or the center. To do that,
we use dot syntax to access those other enumeration values: .leading,
.trailing, or .center are the options available for alignment.
Spacing
The other parameter inside the VStack is the spacing option. This will put
some space between all the child views:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 10) {
            Text("Hi, I'm child one in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child two in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child three in this vertical 
stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child four in this vertical stack, 
              I'm the best")
        }
    }
}
The code puts 10 points of space between each child view, as we can see
here:

--- Page 40 ---
Figure 1.7: VStack spacing
That’s how the VStack works; let’s continue and look at the HStack now.
HStack
In contrast to a VStack, an HStack displays its children horizontally. Here’s
an example:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        HStack() {
            Text("0")
            Text("1")
            Text("2")
            Text("3")
            Text("4")
            Text("5")
            Text("6")
            Text("7")
            Text("8")
            Text("9")
        }.font(.headline)
    }
}
The number views are now all stacked horizontally:

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 1.8: HStack
Adding a font modifier to the entire parent stack will affect all the children
inside it, but to affect an individual child view, you need to place the
modifier on it directly. Here is an example of doing that:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        HStack() {
            Text("0")
            Text("1")
            Text("2")
            Text("3")
            Text("4").font(.title)
            Text("5")
            Text("6")
            Text("7")
            Text("8")
            Text("9")
        }.font(.headline)
    }
}
As a result, the Text view number of 4 has now been altered to have a
larger font:

--- Page 44 ---
Figure 1.9: Modifying the child
Let’s look at another important stack, the ZStack.
ZStack
A ZStack is a stack that will overlay its children, one on top of another.
With this stack, we can create a hierarchy of views, where the first view in
the stack will be placed at the bottom, and subsequent views will be stacked
up on top of each other in sequential order. Take a look at this example:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        ZStack() {
            Image(systemName: 
"rectangle.inset.filled.and.              person.filled")
                .renderingMode(.original)
                .resizable()
                .frame(width: 350, height: 250)
            
            Text("SwiftUI")
                .font(.system(size: 50))
                .foregroundColor(.yellow)
                .padding(.trailing, 80)
        }
    }
}
The code contains two views:
To use a system image in your projects, download the SF Symbols app –
this is free from Apple and contains thousands of images to use in Xcode
from your developer portal. Simply look through the app, pick one, copy its
The first is the Image view, which accepts images that you have
imported into the Assets catalog, and makes it possible to display the
images on the screen. By using the systemName parameter, we can
choose a system image from Apple’s stock of pre-made images, from
many different categories.

--- Page 45 ---
name, and paste it into the Image parameter called systemName. For my
example, I’ve used an image called
rectangle.inset.filled.and.person.filled and have placed it at the
beginning of the ZStack; any view added underneath it will be placed on
top of that image.
Then, I use a little bit of padding, and we can position that text where we
want it. You can also use the offset modifier to place views anywhere on
the screen.
You can see the result of the code in the following figure:
The second view is a Text view, placed on top of the system image by
the ZStack. Again, because the code for the Text view is added under
the code that creates the Image view, it is placed on top of the Image
view when we run the app.

--- Page 47 ---
Figure 1.10: ZStack
There are also three modifiers in this code that we will look at in more
depth when we start building the projects – that’s the renderingMode,
resizable, and frame modifiers. They are used here because we need to
render and resize the image correctly.
Combining stacks
Now that we have seen how the three stacks can be used to display multiple
views and position them where we want them on the screen, let’s look at an
example that combines all three stacks, and the child views inside them, to
produce a varied layout:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            ZStack() {
                Image(systemName: "cloud.moon.rain.fill")
                    .foregroundColor(Color(.systemOrange))
                    .font(.system (size: 150))
                Text("Stormy").bold()
                    .font(.system(size: 30))
                    .offset(x: -15, y: -5)
                    .foregroundColor(.indigo)
            }
            HStack() {
                Image(systemName: "tornado")
                    .foregroundColor(Color(.systemBlue))
                    .font(.system (size: 50))
                
                VStack(alignment: .leading) {
                    Text("Be prepared for anything")
                        .font(.system(size: 25))
                        .fontWeight(.bold)
                    
                    Text("With the Stormy Weather app")
                        .font(.system(size: 16))
                }
            }
        }

--- Page 48 ---
    }
}
Let’s break down this code to get a clear understanding of what we are
doing.
First is the VStack. This will be our main stack and will hold all of our
code. Using the VStack in this way means we can squeeze 10 child views
inside it, but we only need to place a couple of views inside for this
example.
Next is the ZStack. Inside are its two child views – a Text view and an
Image view. Since the Image view comes first in the code, the Text view
gets placed on top of it.
Notice how each child view in the ZStack has its own set of modifiers that
are indented; these are to style these child views with colors and sizes and
to position them on the screen.
The next stack is the HStack. Remember that this arranges its children
horizontally, and it has two child views, including an Image view and
VStack. Notice how we can nest stacks inside of other stacks as we are
doing here, with this VStack inside of a HStack. The HStack places its first
child view to the left – that’s the tornado image – and then places its second
child view to the right – that’s the VStack. If we look inside the VStack
now, it has two child views of its own. They will be placed vertically, with
the smaller text on the bottom.
Don’t worry if this nesting of stacks seems a bit confusing at first; as we
start building projects, you will train your brain to think and see in
hierarchies, and this will become very natural to you.
By nesting the different stacks, we can make all kinds of interesting layout
scenes. Here is the result of our example:

--- Page 50 ---
Figure 1.11: Combining and nesting stacks
Stacks are great for helping to organize and lay our views out on the screen,
but there is another container view we can use that offers even more
flexibility. That’s the GeometryReader view. However, we will look at that
at the end of the chapter.
For now, let’s look at a Spacer view – this is a view that helps with spacing
out the layout in our UI design.
Spacer views
A Spacer view does exactly what its name says: it creates space between
your views by pushing other components to the edges of a container or
helps fill empty space between components. For example, when placed
within a HStack, a Spacer view expands horizontally as much as the stack
allows, moving sibling views out of the way within the limits of the stack’s
size.
This is the Spacer initializer: Spacer(minLength: CGFloat). This
initializer creates a flexible space. The minLength argument sets the
minimum size that the space can take. If the argument is left empty, the
minimum length is zero.
Here’s an example of using a Spacer view in a HStack:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        HStack {
            Text("Hello")
            Spacer()
            Text("World")
        }.padding()
    }
}
This will create a horizontal stack with Hello on the left, World on the
right, and a flexible space in between. The Spacer view will take up all of

--- Page 51 ---
the remaining space so that the two pieces of text are pushed to the edges of
the container:

--- Page 53 ---
Figure 1.12: Spacer
The Spacer view can also be used in the VStack, and it will expand and
push the child views apart vertically instead of horizontally. The Spacer
view won’t do anything within the ZStack though, as that stack deals with
the depth of a view on the z-axis, front to back.
Where Spacer separates views by creating space between them, another
object called a Divider view separates views with a thin line, either
vertically or horizontally.
Divider views
A Divider view is a visual element, a dividing line, that can be used to
separate content either horizontally or vertically. You can also alter the
divider’s thickness. Let’s look at some examples.
Horizontal
The following code creates a horizontal divider:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 10) {
            Text("Hi, I'm child one in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child two in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child three in this vertical 
stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child four in this vertical stack")
            Divider().background(Color.black)
            
            Text("Hi, I'm child five in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child six in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child seven in this vertical 
stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child eight in this vertical 
stack")
        }.padding()

--- Page 54 ---
    }
}
As you can see, we have added a horizontal dividing line and set its color to
black using the background modifier:

--- Page 56 ---
Figure 1.13: Divider
Vertical
If we want to change the horizontal line to a vertical one, then we can pass
the width parameter using a smaller number, and the height parameter
using a larger number, as in this example:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 10) {
            Text("Hi, I'm child one in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child two in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child three in this vertical 
stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child four in this vertical stack")
            
            Divider().frame(height: 200).frame(width: 
              3).background(Color.blue)
            Divider().frame(height:200).frame(width: 
              3).background(Color.blue).offset(x: 300, y: 0)
            
            Text("Hi, I'm child five in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child six in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child seven in this vertical 
stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child eight in this vertical 
stack")
        }.padding()
    }      
}
Using the offset modifier lets us place the line anywhere on the screen, or
on any view for that matter. Here is the result:

--- Page 58 ---
Figure 1.14: Vertical Divider view
Thickness
We can change the thickness of the dividing line using the frame modifier,
like so:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 10) {
            Text("Hi, I'm child one in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child two in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child three in this vertical 
stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child four in this vertical stack")
            Divider().frame(height: 20).frame(width: 
300).              background(Color.blue)
            
            Text("Hi, I'm child five in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child six in this vertical stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child seven in this vertical 
stack")
            Text("Hi, I'm child eight in this vertical 
stack")
        }.padding()
    }
}
Then, by using the height and width parameters of the frame modifier, we
can change the dimensions of the Divider view, so we can make a line as
long and wide as we want. The result of our example can be seen here:

--- Page 60 ---
Figure 1.15: Divider thickness
That’s pretty much all the configuring we can do with the Divider view.
Let’s now look at one of the most frequently used modifiers in SwiftUI –
the padding modifier.
The padding modifier
You may have noticed that we have used the padding modifier quite a bit
already without really explaining it yet.
Every view has its own dimensions and space that it takes up on the screen.
For example, we can place two views side by side and they will be very
close to each other, separated by only a few points.
Points and pixels refer to different ways of measuring the size of the views
on the screen.
Points are used to specify the size of text and other UI elements, and they
are independent of the resolution of the device’s screen. This means that a
point will always be the same size on any device, regardless of the screen’s
resolution.
Pixels, on the other hand, are the individual dots that make up the screen of
an iPhone (or any other device). Pixels are used to measure the physical
resolution of a device’s screen.
When you add a padding modifier to a view, it adds a small amount of
empty space all around that view by default, and that space is measured in
points. The padding modifier by default adds eight points of empty space
around a view, but if you want to be more specific about the amount of
space with which to pad your view, then you can pass in a value (an integer)
for a custom amount of padding. Let’s look at an example:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack{
            VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 10) {

--- Page 61 ---
                Text("There is padding all around this view")
                Text("There is padding all around this view")
                Text("There is padding all around this view")
                Text("There is padding all around this view")
                
            }.background(Color.yellow)
                .padding(30)
                .background(Color.red)
        }
    }
}
In this code, there are four Text views inside the VStack. At the end of the
VStack’s closing brace is a call to the background modifier, which will
color the background yellow so that you can see the padding modifier at
work. Next, I added the padding modifier and passed in 30 points, which
will be applied around the VStack equally. Finally, I colored the padding
red, again, using the background modifier, so you can see the padding
directly. In the example, the padding will look like a red frame around
VStack, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 63 ---
Figure 1.16: Padding
Let’s look at some of the other padding options. The modifier allows us to
choose from predefined enum values if we only want to pad one side, as in
the following code:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack{
            VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 10) {
                Text("The leading edge has been padded")
            }.padding(.leading, 75)
        }
    }
} 
This code pads only the leading edge of each Text view by 75 points of
space:

--- Page 65 ---
Figure 1.17: Padding options
We can also choose other padding options by typing in a dot for the
alignment parameter and selecting from many different options, including
trailing, top, bottom, horizontal, infinity, and others.
Looking at the previous code, notice the placement of the padding
modifier; it has been put on the closing brace of the VStack. When placed
like this, all the children inside the VStack have the padding applied to
them, but if we want to pad the child views individually, we can do so by
placing modifiers directly on them:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack{
            VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 10) {
                Text("I'm padded on the leading 
edge").padding                   (.leading, 75)
                Text("I'm padded on the trailing 
edge").padding                   (.trailing, 75)
                Text("I'm padded on the leading 
edge").padding                   (.leading, 75)
                Text("I'm padded on the trailing 
edge").padding                   (.trailing, 75)
                Text("I'm padded on the leading 
edge").padding                   (.leading, 75)
                Text("I'm padded on the trailing 
edge").padding                   (.trailing, 75)
                Text("I'm padded on the leading 
edge").padding                   (.leading, 75)
                Text("I'm padded on the trailing 
edge").padding                   (.trailing, 75)
            }
        }
    }
}
As you can see, you can add modifiers to child views individually, styling
them as you need for your layout. The result is as follows:

--- Page 67 ---
Figure 1.18: Padding children
Each child view now has its own padding, either leading or trailing,
which alters its placement on the screen.
Let’s finish up this chapter by looking at closures, which is essentially a
function without a name, and then another container view that offers some
more flexibility than the other stacks we previously looked at – the
GeometryReader view.
Closures
Here is the easy definition of a closure: a closure is a function without a
name. Remember a function is a block of code that runs whatever code
statements are in its body when it is called.
But let’s look at a more detailed definition of a closure: a closure is a self-
contained block of code that can be passed around and executed at a later
time.
Closures are not exactly functions, but they are similar, with some key
differences:
In SwiftUI, closures are often used as a way to respond to user input or
other events. For example, you might use a closure as the action for a
button, or to provide a block of code to be executed when a view appears or
disappears.
Closures can be stored as variables and passed as arguments to
functions
Closures can capture and store references to any variables or constants
from the context in which they are defined, which allows them to
maintain the state and preserve data between invocations
Closures don’t have a name as a function would

--- Page 68 ---
Here’s an example of a closure being used as the action for a button in
SwiftUI:
Button(action: {
    // this block of code will be run when the button is 
      clicked
    print("Button was clicked!")
}) {
    Text("Button")
}
In this example, the closure is defined using the { } syntax and is passed as
the action parameter to the Button view. Yes, that’s right, the Button
action is a closure, and when the button is pressed, the code inside the
closure will be executed.
Closures can also be used to provide custom behavior for views in SwiftUI.
For example, you might use a closure to perform some custom animation
when a view appears or disappears:
struct MyView: View {
    var body: some View {
        Text("Hello, SwiftUI!")
            .onAppear {
                // this block of code will run when the view 
                  appears
                print("The view appeared!")
            }
    }
}
In this example, the onAppear modifier is called on the Text view and is
passed a closure that will be executed when the view appears on the screen.
We also have trailing closures. A trailing closure is a closure that is written
after the function or method it is passed to. The closure is “trailing” because
it comes after the function or method.
Here’s an example of a function that takes a closure as an argument:

--- Page 69 ---
func doSomething(completion: () -> Void) {
    // Do some work!
    print("Work complete")
    completion()
}
Here’s how you would call this function and pass a closure as an argument:
doSomething {
    // this block of code will run when the "completion" 
      closure is called
    print("completion closure called!")
}
In this example, the closure is written after the doSomething function and is
therefore a trailing closure. In SwiftUI, you can use trailing closures to
provide custom behavior for views. For example, you might use a trailing
closure to perform some custom animation when a view appears or
disappears:
Text("Hello, World!")
    .onAppear {
        // this block of code will be executed when the view 
          appears
        print("View appeared!")
    }
In this example, the onAppear method is called on the Text view and is
passed a trailing closure that will be executed when the view appears on the
screen.
Don’t worry if you haven’t quite grasped how closures work yet; they are
not as complicated as they appear, and you will understand them better as
we progress throughout the book. For now, let’s move on to
GeometryReader.

--- Page 70 ---
GeometryReader
The GeometryReader view is another container view that offers more
flexibility than the other stacks we previously looked at. The closure
(function) of GeometryReader will contain the position and size of the view
we are working with, and we can then alter or place that view however we
want with the values that are returned by GeometryReader’s proxy.
Using these values, we can make the child views dynamically update their
position depending on the device size and position when the orientation
changes to either landscape or portrait. This all will become clearer when
we see an example.
Let’s look at how to create GeometryReader. The following is the initializer
used to create the GeometryReader view:
GeometryReader(content: _)
The content parameter is a closure that receives a geometry proxy value
with the view’s position and dimensions.
To retrieve those values, we use the following properties and method:
Here is the code to create an empty GeometryReader:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
           GeometryReader {_ in
            //empty geometry reader
The size property will return the width and height of the
GeometryReader view
The safeAreaInsets property will return an EdgeInsets value with
the insets for the safe area
The frame(in: ) method returns the position and size of the
GeometryReader view

--- Page 71 ---
        }.background(Color.yellow)
     }
  }
This is what we see when we run the code. Notice how it pushes itself out
to occupy all the space on the screen; the yellow background shows all the
areas of this empty GeometryReader, which is the entire screen.

--- Page 73 ---
Figure 1.19: GeometryReader
The default behavior of GeometryReader is to align its children in the
upper-left corner and place them on top of each other. In this next example,
the code places three views inside GeometryReader:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        GeometryReader {_ in
             Image(systemName: "tornado")
             Image(systemName: "tornado")
             Image(systemName: "tornado")
               }.background(Color.yellow)
            .font(.largeTitle)
    }
}
When we run this code, notice that only one tornado image is visible:

--- Page 75 ---
Figure 1.20: GeometryReader default child alignment
There are actually three tornado images in this example, but you can only
see one because the default behavior is to place them on top of each other in
the upper-left corner.
We obviously don’t want all the child views stacked on one another, so we
will explore the following concepts to really utilize GeometryReader:
We’ll look at these now.
Sizing views
Let’s first look at the property that is used to access the GeometryReader’s
size... aptly named, the size property. This will return the width and height
of the GeometryReader view.
Here is an example of adding an image inside the GeometryReader view,
and seeing how it adapts its size when the device is rotated:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View          
 GeometryReader { geometryProxy in
            Image("swiftui_icon")
                .resizable()
                .scaledToFit()
                .frame(width: geometryProxy.size.width / 2, 
                  height: geometryProxy.size.height / 4)
                .background(Color.gray)
        }
    }
}
Sizing a view to accommodate rotating the device
Positioning a view anywhere on the screen
Reading a view’s position in terms of its global and local space

--- Page 76 ---
The following figure shows the size of the image in portrait mode:

--- Page 78 ---
Figure 1.21: GeometryReader size property (portrait)
In portrait mode, the image is bigger, but when the device is rotated to
landscape, the image scales down to adapt to the screen change, as shown
here:
Figure 1.22: GeometryReader size property (landscape)
In this example, we added an Image view within a GeometryReader view. I
defined the Proxy parameter as geometryProxy, but you can call it anything
you want. geometryProxy holds the information about GeometryReader’s
dimensions and position. Using this Proxy object, the size of the image is
changed when we rotate the device. The image will be half the width of the
container, and the height will be a quarter of the height of the container.
Using geometryProxy.size lets us access the height and width of
GeometryReader. The Image view will adapt when the device is rotated. I’m
also using the scaledToFit modifier so that we can keep the correct aspect
ratio for the image.

--- Page 79 ---
I set the Image view’s background to gray so that you can see the space
that’s available in both portrait and landscape modes. When it’s in
landscape mode, there’s much more space available around the Image view
because it scales down.
Also notice that the image is positioned in the top-left corner of the
GeometryReader view. Again, that’s the default location for its child views;
they will simply stack up on each other in that area.
Next, we will look at positioning those child views anywhere we want
within the GeometryReader container.
Positioning views
We’ve seen how GeometryReader can dynamically change the size of a
view as it’s rotated, but it can also position the views within it. The
positioning information is returned by the geometryProxy closure, and we
can pass that information into the x and y parameters of the position
modifier via the size property. Here’s an example:
 struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
 
GeometryReader { geometryProxy in
            //top right position
            VStack {
                Image(systemName: "tornado")
                .imageScale(.large)
            Text("Top Right")
                .font(.title)
            }.position(x: geometryProxy.size.width - 80, y: 
              geometryProxy.size.height / 40)
 
            //bottom left position
            VStack {
                Image(systemName: "tornado")
                .imageScale(.large)
                
            Text("Bottom Left")
                .font(.title)
            }.position(x: geometryProxy.size.width - 300,y: 

--- Page 80 ---
              geometryProxy.size.height - 40)
        }.background(Color.accentColor)
        .foregroundColor(.white)
    }
}
The code here has two VStacks within GeometryReader, and each VStack
has the position modifier on its closing brace, so everything within the
VStacks will be positioned according to the values in the position
modifier’s x and y parameters.
The result when running this code is the placement of the Image and Text
views according to the size.width and size.height values, as shown in
this figure:

--- Page 82 ---
Figure 1.23: GeometryReader positioning views
Let’s continue with GeometryReader and see how we can read the values of
its position.
Reading the position
If we need to get the position of the GeometryReader view in terms of its
coordinate location, again, we can use the geometryProxy object and pass
its information into the frame() method.
There are two coordinate spaces in SwiftUI:
When reading the values of the local coordinate space of the
GeometryReader view, we will always see 0,0 for x and y. That’s because
GeometryReader always starts at that position, 0,0, the top-left corner of the
screen.
So, to get the position of the views in relation to where they are on the
screen, we need to use the global coordinates. Here is an example that gets
and displays the local and global values for the GeometryReader view:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        GeometryReader { geometryProxy in
            VStack {
                Image("SwiftUIIcon")
                    .resizable()
                    .scaledToFit()
                Text("Global").font(.title)
                Text("X, Y \(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
                  CoordinateSpace.global).origin.x, 
specifier:                   "(%.f,") \
(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
.global).                  origin.y, specifier: "%.f)")")
Global space: The coordinates of the entire screen
Local space: The coordinates of individual views

--- Page 83 ---
                Text("Local").font(.title)
                Text("X, Y  \(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
.local).                  origin.x, specifier: "(%.f") \
(geometryProxy.                  frame(in: .local).origin.y, 
specifier:                   "%.f)")")
            }
        }.frame(height: 250)
    }
}
Note
Notice that the values are being formatted using a format specifier: %.f.
This format specifier will truncate some of the decimal places so it displays
fewer zeros.
Running the code will display the x and y coordinate values for both the
global and local space for the views, when the device is in portrait mode, as
shown here:

--- Page 85 ---
Figure 1.24: Reading the position (portrait)
Rotating the device into landscape mode changes the global values to
reflect the new location of the Image and Text views, as shown here:
Figure 1.25: Reading the position (landscape)
The code in this example demonstrates the difference between the global
and local coordinate spaces. The values for the local coordinate space
always return 0,0 because that is the starting position of GeometryReader,
but the values for the global coordinate space are the origin of the
geometryProxy frame within the entire screen. So, the global values change
as the device is rotated because the view’s position has changed. The local
values do not change as they reflect the screen’s upper-left corner, 0,0.
SwiftUI also offers properties to get the minimum, middle, and maximum
coordinate positions from within GeometryReader’s frame for both the
global and local spaces:
Text("minX: \(geometryProxy.frame(in: .local).minX))")
Text("minX: \(geometryProxy.frame(in: .local).midX))")
Text("maxX: \(geometryProxy.frame(in: .local).maxX))")

--- Page 86 ---
Text("minX: \(geometryProxy.frame(in: .global).minY))")
Text("minX: \(geometryProxy.frame(in: .global).midY))")
Text("maxX: \(geometryProxy.frame(in: .global).maxY))")
We use these properties with dot syntax, right at the end of the frame
method. Here is an example:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        GeometryReader { geometryProxy in
            VStack() {
                Spacer()
                Text("Local Values").font(.title2).bold()
                HStack() {
                    Text("minX: \
(Int(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
                      .local).minX))")
                    Spacer()
                    Text("midX: \
(Int(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
                      .local).midX))")
                    Spacer()
                    Text("maxX: \
(Int(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
                      .local).maxX))")
                }
                
                Divider().background(Color.black)
                
                Text("Global Values").font(.title2).bold()
                HStack() {
                    Text("minX: \
(Int(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
                      .global).minX))")
                    Spacer()
                    Text("midX: \
(Int(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
                      .global).midX))")
                    Spacer()
                    Text("maxX: \
(Int(geometryProxy.frame(in: 
                      .global).maxX))")
                }
                Spacer()
                
            }.padding(.horizontal)

--- Page 87 ---
        }
    }
}
This code will return the minimum, the middle, and the maximum x and y
coordinates for GeometryReader’s frame and display them on the screen for
both local and global spaces in portrait mode, as shown here:

--- Page 89 ---
Figure 1.26: Using the min, mid, and max properties (portrait)
When the device is rotated, those values will adjust to new values that
reflect the change in the screen’s orientation, as shown here:
Figure 1.27: Using the min, mid, and max properties (landscape)
The SwiftUI structures you have just learned about will be the building
blocks for the programs we will write going forward. Rather than listing all
the structures in one chapter, which can be a lot to take in, I will introduce
new ones in different projects throughout the book.
Summary
To sum up what we learned in this chapter, we introduced SwiftUI and saw
the difference between the two programming paradigms, imperative and
declarative. After that, we explored the Xcode interface. Then, we covered
the important function of the state, and finally looked at the building blocks
of SwiftUI – these are fundamentals that you will use throughout this book
and are an essential first step toward creating beautiful animations in
SwiftUI.

--- Page 90 ---
In the next chapter, we will explore animations, how they work, and the
kinds of properties that can be animated.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 91 ---
Understanding Animation with
SwiftUI
In the first chapter, we covered many SwiftUI fundamentals we will see
when we start building projects. In this chapter, we will look at how
animations work, including timing curves and animatable properties, which
will lay the foundation for the projects we build.
The following are the key topics we will explore:
Technical requirements
You can find the code for this chapter on GitHub in the Chapter 2 folder:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-Applications.
What is animation?
Let’s consider the book’s definition of animation. Animation is a series of
static images displayed in rapid succession to create the illusion of motion.
The images, or frames, are usually displayed at a rate of 24 or 30 frames per
second from the beginning to the end, which is fast enough to create the
illusion of continuous motion. These can be created using a variety of
techniques, including hand-drawn, computer-generated, and stop-motion
animations.
What is animation?
Understanding timing curves
Understanding animation types
Triggering animations
Exploring animatable properties

--- Page 92 ---
Looking at this definition, we can see that there is a start point and an end
point to animation, and the images in between are all slightly different;
when played, our eyes cannot pick out the individual images, which means
we perceive movement or animation.
In SwiftUI, we have to define the start point (where the animation begins)
and the end point (where the animation ends). However, when we code, we
don’t actually put a bunch of still images between both end points (though
we can); what we usually do is use a single image and then animate the
properties of that image, such as its location on the screen, its opacity, or its
color.
In addition to images, we can also animate RGB colors by changing their
hue or the corner radius of shapes, and if we draw a shape, we can animate
the individual lines (paths) or the strokes around it.
It works like this: if we want a rectangle to move from the bottom left to the
top right of the iPhone or iPad screen, we declare it in code (that declarative
syntax thing again) by using the animation modifier. Then SwiftUI does
the magic for us, moving the object, or in SwiftUI speak, “transitioning” the
object from a start point to an end point, filling in all the gaps along the way
with whatever values we are working with (integers, colors, opacity, etc.).
The process of going through all the values to create a smooth fluid motion
is called interpolation.
SwiftUI fills in those gaps for us really well, but it cannot animate every
property of every view. Only properties considered “animatable” can be
animated; things such as a view’s color, opacity, rotation, size, position,
corner radius, and strokes. Nearly all properties that have a numerical value
are animatable.
SwiftUI includes basic animations with default or custom easing or timing
curves (a timing curve refers to the speed at the start and end of the
animation), as well as spring animations. Spring animations have a bouncy
effect to them and can be adjusted from a slight bounce to a very
pronounced bounce, similar to a rubber ball bouncing on the floor.

--- Page 93 ---
You can also change many customization options, such as the speed of an
animation, add a “wait” time before the animation starts, and have an
animation repeat itself.
Let’s continue by diving deeper into animation timing curves, seeing what
they look like and how they affect an animation.
Understanding timing curves
Animations have what are called curves. A curve, or more specifically, a
timing curve, refers to the speed at which the animation starts and how it
should end.
SwiftUI provides several timing curves to choose from that we can use
inside the animation modifier. It’s called a timing curve because if you
were to plot each point of the animation’s movement from start to finish on
a graph, and draw a line by connecting those points, most of them would
create a curved line, as in this illustration:
Figure 2.1: The ease timing curves
This graph shows three animation timing curves: easeIn, easeOut, and
easeInOut. The beginning of the animation is at the bottom left, and the
end is at the top right. In the easeInOut timing curve, the animation starts
slow, speeds up, and then finally slows down before coming to a complete
stop.

--- Page 94 ---
There is also a linear timing curve. An animation using this curve will have
the same rate of speed at its beginning as it does at its end. If you were to
plot it on a graph, it would be a straight line, like so:
Figure 2.2: The linear timing curve
Timing curves are not complicated – we get to choose the ones we want
based on how we want the animation to look and perform. If you don’t
specify a timing curve, you will get the default curve, the easeInOut one.
We will use some of these SwiftUI-provided timing curves in our projects.
In the next section, I want to explain the two distinct types of animation in
SWiftUI: implicit and explicit.
Understanding animation types
There are two types of animations in SwiftUI: implicit and explicit. Let’s
look at what these animation types do and the difference between the two.
An implicit animation is an animation that is automatically applied to a
property when its value is changed. In SwiftUI, implicit animations are
created using the .animation modifier. Here is an example:

--- Page 95 ---
struct ContentView: View {
    @State private var grow: CGFloat = 1
    var body: some View {
        Circle()
            .frame(width: 100, height: 100)
            .foregroundColor(.blue)
            .onTapGesture {
                self.grow += 0.5
            }
            .scaleEffect(grow)
            .animation(.default, value: grow)
    }
}
In this example, we use a tap gesture to scale up the size of a circle; when
tapped, the circle will grow by half its size. The .animation modifier uses
the default animation style, which will animate the circle using an
easeInOut timing curve by default.
You can also use other animation styles. For example, here, I added a
spring style instead of the default style:
var body: some View {
        Circle()
••••••••
            .scaleEffect(grow)
            .animation(.spring(dampingFraction: 
0.3,blendDuration: 0.5),value: grow)
    }
This style will animate the circle and add a springy effect to it.
So implicit animations are a convenient way to add basic animations to
your SwiftUI app without having to write any explicit animation code. The
animations are applied using the animation modifier.
Sometimes though, you may want more from your animation, and implicit
animations may not give you the degree of control that you are looking for.
In this case, you can use explicit animations instead.

--- Page 96 ---
An explicit animation is an animation you create and add inside the code
block using the withAnimation function. Here’s an example:
struct ContentView: View {
    @State private var scaleUp: CGFloat = 1
    var body: some View {
        Button(action: {
            //Animate the scale of the view when the button 
is               tapped
            withAnimation(.interpolatingSpring(stiffness: 
60,               damping: 2)) {
                scaleUp *= 1.4
            }
        }) {
            Text("Scale up")
                .scaleEffect(scaleUp)  // explicit animation
        }
    }
}
In this example, tapping the button will animate the scale of the text using a
spring animation. The duration of the animation will be determined by the
system’s default animation settings, but the curve of the animation will be
customized using the interpolatingSpring function.
Additionally, you can customize the duration of the animation by specifying
a duration parameter in the interpolatingSpring function. The following
is an example of this:
withAnimation(.interpolatingSpring(stiffness: 60, damping: 
2, duration: 2.5)) { scaleUp *= 1.5 }
This will cause the animation to last for 2.5 seconds.
So, the difference when using explicit animations versus implicit
animations is that they can give you more control over the details of the
animation, or when you want to animate multiple properties
simultaneously; you can put as much code into the withAnimation block as
needed. However, they can be more work to set up than implicit animations.

--- Page 97 ---
You can also have the animation repeat itself a pre-set number of times or
indefinitely. Here’s an example of repeating the previous animation forever
and auto-reversing it:
withAnimation(.interpolatingSpring(stiffness: 60, damping: 
2).repeatForever(autoreverses: true)) {
                    scaleUp *= 1.4
                }
In the previous example, I altered the code in the withAnimation function
to include the repeatForever option and set the autoreverses parameter
to true. When you run the code, the text will scale up with a springy effect,
and when it’s done bouncing (about 3 seconds or so), the animation will
start over, repeating endlessly or until the app is stopped.
Those are the two types of animations; next is a list of ways to trigger
animations.
Triggering animations
So, how do we trigger animations? There are several ways to do so in
SwiftUI, including using the following SwiftUI modifiers, methods, and
functions:
The .animation() modifier: This modifier allows you to specify the
type of animation used when a view appears or disappears or when its
state changes.
The withAnimation() function: This function allows you to wrap a
block of code that changes the state of a view, and it will automatically
animate the changes.
A gesture: This is a way to interact with a view by performing actions
such as tapping, dragging, or pinching. You can use a gesture to trigger
an animation when a certain action is performed on a view.
A timer: This allows you to specify an animation to be performed over
a certain period of time. You can use a timer to animate the changes to a

--- Page 98 ---
There are other ways to trigger animations, but these are the main ones that
we will cover here. Whatever you choose will depend on the specific needs
of your app and the behavior you want to produce. We will explore these
different triggers when we start building our projects in the coming
chapters.
Let’s continue by looking at various properties that can be animated in
SwiftUI.
Exploring animatable properties
In this section, we will explore some of the animatable properties. Here is a
list of the ones that we will look at:
Let’s take a look at them in more detail.
view’s state over a specific duration.
The onAppear() and onDisappear() modifiers: These modifiers allow
you to specify code to be executed when a view appears or disappears.
These modifiers can trigger an animation when a view appears or
disappears.
Button and other control views: A button, slider, picker, or other
control type view in SwiftUI can be a trigger for an animation.
Offset
Hue rotation
Opacity
Scale
Stroke
Trim
Corner radius

--- Page 99 ---
The offset property
The first property we will look at that is animatable is the offset property.
This property is responsible for offsetting a view on the x- and y-axes,
basically giving you control to place that view anywhere on the screen. The
following is an example of animating the offset modifier that has been
placed on a rectangle shape:
struct Offset_Example: View {
    @State private var moveRight = false
    var body: some View {
       //MARK: - ANIMATE OFFSET
        VStack {
            RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 20)
                .foregroundColor(.blue)
                .frame(width: 75, height: 75)
                .offset(x: moveRight ? 150 : 0, y: 350 )
                .animation(Animation.default, value: 
moveRight)
            Spacer()
            Button("Animate") {
                moveRight.toggle()
            }.font(.title2)
        }
    }
}
After you put that code into your ContentView file, your preview will look
like Figure 2.3. When you press the Animate button, the blue rectangle will
move to the right, and when you press it again, it will return to its original
starting position.

--- Page 100 ---
Figure 2.3: Animating the offset
This is how the code works. When the Animate button is pressed, the
moveRight variable has its value toggled or changed to true, and the
offset modifier has a ternary operator in there for its x parameter.
A ternary operator is an operator that accepts a Boolean variable and checks
to see whether it’s true or false. If the variable is true, the value to the
left of the colon is used, but if the variable is false, the value to the right of
the colon is used. This makes it similar to an if statement but different
because an if statement can check for multiple conditions.

--- Page 101 ---
So, if moveRight is true, then the rounded rectangle is placed 150 points to
the right; otherwise, if false, it is left where it is (the 0 value means do
nothing). The animation modifier also picks up on any change because it
has the moveRight variable in there for the value parameter. This value
parameter takes the variable that you are using for the animation. The
animation modifier will then interpolate over the values from the start to
the finish point and move the object smoothly, creating a nice, fluid
animation.
Here’s a way to really see how the animation modifier is working. If you
comment out the animation statement in the code and press the button, you
will see that the object still moves 150 points to the right, but it does so
instantly; there is no gliding across the screen now; the object just appears
at its new location 150 points to the right. To create smooth, fluid
animations, we need that animation modifier and its behind-the-scenes
interpolating magic. This is part of the reason why we use less code in
SwiftUI versus coding animation in UIKit; much of the heavy lifting is
already done for us in the background with SwiftUI.
This was an example of animating an object from one point to another by
changing the numerical value for the x parameter in the offset modifier.
Let’s look at another property that’s animatable: HueRotation.
Hue rotation
Hue rotation is a type of color effect that can be applied to views and other
components. It’s a modifier that allows you to adjust the hue of a color by
adding or subtracting a fixed angle from its hue value. You can use hue
rotation to create a range of related colors.
The modifier has an angle parameter that takes a value in radians or
degrees. That value is based on a circle, which is 360 degrees and
represents a wheel of all the colors that we can think of.
Let’s look at an Xcode example:

--- Page 102 ---
struct Hue_Rotation_Example: View {
    @State private var hueRotate = false
        var body: some View {
        //MARK: - ANIMATE HUE ROTATION
        VStack(spacing: 20) {
            Text("ANIMATE HUE ").font(.title2).bold()
            // rotate the colors and stop halfway around the 
              color wheel
            RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 25)
                .frame(width: 200, height: 200)
                .foregroundColor(.red)
                .hueRotation(Angle.degrees(hueRotate ? 180 : 
                  0))
                .animation(.easeInOut(duration: 2), value: 
                  hueRotate)
            // rotate the colors around the color wheel one 
              full revolution (360 degrees)
            Divider().background(Color.black)
            Text("ANIMATE HUE WITH 
GRADIENT").font(.title2).              bold()
            AngularGradient(gradient: Gradient(colors: 
[Color.              red, Color.blue]), center: .center)
                .hueRotation(Angle.degrees(hueRotate ? 360 : 
                  0))
                .animation(.easeInOut(duration: 2), value: 
                  hueRotate)
                .mask(Circle())
                .frame(width: 200, height: 200)
            Button("Animate") {
                hueRotate.toggle()
            }
            .font(.title)
        }
    }
}
When you add the code into Xcode, your previews will look like Figure
2.4:

--- Page 103 ---
Figure 2.4: Animating the hue rotation
I created two objects in this example: a rounded rectangle and an angular
gradient circle.
In the rounded rectangle, I used a ternary operator to check whether the
hueRotate variable is true. When it becomes true via the Animate button
being pressed, the value to the left of the colon inside the ternary operator is
used, 180 degrees. Then the animation starts going through the color
spectrum and stops halfway through to display that color.

--- Page 104 ---
Notice the use of the duration function just after the timing curve. This
function allows us to set the duration of the animation; do we want it to
happen fast, or do we want the animation to happen over a longer period? It
has one parameter, and that is the amount of time we want the animation to
take to complete; for that, we use an integer value. I set the value to 2, so it
can slow things down a little, taking the animation 2 seconds to complete.
Looking at the angular gradient example, I’m using a value of 360 degrees.
When we press the Animate button, the code animates through the entire
color wheel and stops where it started (360 degrees is one revolution of a
circle), thus displaying the original color.
Taking a look at the hueRotate variable inside the body of the button, we
have two ways that we can start the animation. The first is by explicitly
setting hueRotate to true, like this:
hueRotate = true
Or by using the toggle method like we’re doing in the code:
hueRotate.toggle()
The difference between these two ways of starting the animation is that
firstly, the animation starts and then finishes, but it never reverses itself
with subsequent button presses. If you’d like the animation to start and
finish, and on the next button press reverse itself, then use the toggle
method.
What’s also very interesting is that we can animate the colors of shapes and
other objects, but also animate the colors that make up images, as we will
see in the upcoming projects.
You can also use the hueRotation() modifier in combination with other
modifiers, such as brightness() or saturation(), to create some complex
and interesting color adjustments.

--- Page 105 ---
Let’s continue looking at the different properties to animate and at a very
common property, opacity.
Opacity
Opacity refers to the transparency of a view, whether you can see it clearly,
whether it is partially visible, or maybe you can’t see it at all. We can use
the opacity modifier to make views appear and disappear. When we add
animation to the opacity, the transition from shown to hidden is interpolated
over, so it smoothly fades in and out.
Here's an example of adding opacity to an animation:
struct Opacity__Example: View {
    @State private var appear = true
    var body: some View {
//MARK: - ANIMATE OPACITY
        VStack{
            Text("Appear/Disappear")
                .font(.title).bold()
            Circle()
                .foregroundColor(.purple)
                .opacity(appear ? 1 : 0)
                .animation(.easeIn, value: appear)
                .frame(height: 175)
            Button("Animate") {
                appear.toggle()
            }.font(.title2)
            //MARK: - OVERLAPPING OPACITY
            VStack{
                Text("Overlapping Opacity").bold()
                    .font(.title)
                Circle()
                    .foregroundColor(.yellow)
                    .frame(height: 100)
                    .opacity(0.5)
                Circle()
                    .foregroundColor(.red)
                    .frame(height: 100)
                    .opacity(0.5)
                    .padding(-60)
            }.padding(60)
        }

--- Page 106 ---
    }
}
The preceding code will produce the following results, as shown in Figure
2.5:
Figure 2.5: Animating the opacity
In our first example, the animation variable is called appear, and it’s set to
true as its default value, which shows the circle. When the Animate button
is pressed, the variable gets toggled to false, and the circle animates itself

--- Page 107 ---
until it completely disappears. And when the button is pressed again, the
animation gets set to true, and the circle becomes visible again. Again,
using the animation modifier initiates the interpolation over the start and
end values, so the circle doesn’t just appear or disappear instantly; there is a
gradual change of state until the end of the animation is reached.
The second example of the two circles overlapping at the bottom of the
screen demonstrates a unique component of opacity in SwiftUI. When we
apply the opacity modifier to a view that already had its opacity
transformed, the modifier will multiply the overall effect. For example, the
yellow and red circles have their opacity set at 50%, overlapping each other.
The top red circle allows some of the bottom yellow circle to show through,
thus multiplying the opacity effect so that area is a little darker, and at the
same time, mingling the two colors, creating orange.
Next, let’s take a look at animating the size or scale of a view, which we can
do with the scaleEffect modifier.
Scale
Every view has a specific size, and we can change that size by scaling it up
or down with animation. We can do this with the scaleEffect modifier.
Here’s an example of how we can animate the scale of a view:
struct Scale_Example_One: View {
    @State private var scaleCircle = false
    var body: some View {
            //MARK: - ANIMATE THE SCALE OF A CIRCLE SHAPE
            VStack {
                Text("SCALE SHAPE").font(.title).bold()
                Circle()
                    .frame(width: 150)
                    .foregroundColor(.green)
                    .scaleEffect(scaleCircle ? 0.1 : 1)
                    .animation(.default, value: scaleCircle)
                Button("Scale Shape") {
                    scaleCircle.toggle()
                }
            }.font(.title2)

--- Page 108 ---
        }
    }
The preceding code will produce the following results, as shown in Figure
2.6:
Figure 2.6: Scaling a shape
You should be starting to recognize much of the code that we’re using; for
example, we use a VStack to hold our views, so they get stacked vertically,
and we can use the button control as a way to start the animation.

--- Page 109 ---
In the example, I’m creating a simple green circle and using the
scaleEffect modifier, passing in our animating variable. When the state
changes to true, the circle scales down to one-tenth of its size, and when
false, it goes back to its original size.
We’re using the animation modifier again with the default timing curve.
The default curve is an easeInOut curve, which we discussed earlier in the
chapter. An easeInOut curve will cause the animation to start slowly, then
ramp up to its top speed, and then finish by easing out slowly again.
Let’s look at another example of scaling up and down, but instead of scaling
a shape that we created using the circle initializer, we’re using a system
image to show you that you can also scale images:
struct Scale_Example_Two: View {
    @State private var scaleBug = false
    var body: some View {
        //MARK: - ANIMATE THE SCALE OF A SYSTEM IMAGE
        VStack{
            Text("SCALE IMAGE").font(.title).bold()
            Image(systemName: "ladybug.fill")
                .renderingMode(.original) //allows 
multicolor                   for SF Symbols
                .resizable()
                .frame(width: 150, height: 150, alignment: 
                  .center)
                .scaleEffect(scaleBug ? 0.1 : 1)
                .animation(.default, value: scaleBug)
                .padding(10)
            Button("Scale Image") {
                scaleBug.toggle()
            }
        }.font(.title2)
    }
}
The preceding code will produce the following results, as shown in Figure
2.7:

--- Page 110 ---
Figure 2.7: Scaling an image
This particular image is a system image from the SF Symbols app. If you
don’t have this app yet, I highly recommend it. You can download it for free
at the Apple Developer portal. In it, Apple has given us thousands of images
we can use in our code. And what’s new in the latest release is that now,
many of the images can be rendered in multicolor: we have to set the
rendering mode to .original so the image gets shown with colors, instead
of just black or white.
Note

--- Page 111 ---
Not all images can be colored. Look in the SF Symbols app to see which
ones can be colored.
Finally, in this third example of a scaling animation, we use the anchor
method, which scales the view by the given amount in both the horizontal
and vertical directions relative to an anchor point:
struct Scale_Example_Three: View {
    @State private var scaleFromAnchor = true
    var body: some View {
                VStack{
            Text("SCALE FROM ANCHOR ").font(.title).bold()
            Image(systemName: "heart.fill")
                .renderingMode(.original) //allows the use 
of                   multicolor for SF Symbols
                .resizable()
                .frame(width: 150, height: 125, alignment: 
                  .center)
                .scaleEffect(scaleFromAnchor ? 1 : 0.2, 
anchor:                   .bottomTrailing)
                .animation(.default, value: scaleFromAnchor)
                .padding(10)
            Button("Scale from Anchor") {
                scaleFromAnchor.toggle()
            }
        }.font(.title2)
    }
}
The preceding code will produce the following results, as shown in Figure
2.8:

--- Page 112 ---
Figure 2.8: Scaling from an anchor point
All views have an anchor point, which is usually in the middle of the view.
But we can change that anchor point, and have the animation scale the
object based on where that anchor point is. In the code, I used the
.bottomTrailing option as the anchor point, so when we press the button,
the heart image scales down and toward the trailing edge (the right side of
the screen), rather than scaling from the center of the object. However,
SwiftUI also gives us the following anchor points to choose from:
bottomTrailing

--- Page 113 ---
In this final section, we will look at three more properties that can be
animated: stroke, trim, and cornerRadius.
Stroke, trim, and corner radius
Let’s now look at three more properties we can animate: the stroke of a line,
the trim of a circle, and the corner radius of a rectangle.
The stroke of a shape is the outline or border of the shape. It has a
particular color and width and can have various attributes such as line cap
style or line join style. Let’s animate the stroke of a rectangle, so it gets
thicker or thinner with each button press:
struct Stroke_Example: View {
    @State private var animateStroke = false
    var body: some View {
        //MARK: - ANIMATE THE STROKE OF THE ROUNDED RECT
        VStack{
            Text("ANIMATE STROKE").font(.title).bold()
            RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 30)
                .stroke(Color.purple, style: 
                  StrokeStyle(inewidth: animateStroke ? 25 : 
                  1))
                .frame(width: 100, height: 100)
                .animation(.default, value: animateStroke)
            Button("Animate Stroke") {
                animateStroke.toggle()
trailing
bottom
center
top
bottomLeading
topLeading
topTrailing
leading

--- Page 114 ---
            }
        }.font(.title2)
    }
}
Either a thick or thin stroke line is created around the rectangle, as shown in
Figure 2.9:
Figure 2.9: Animating the stroke
The first thing we do is define our animation variable, setting its initial
value to false. Looking inside the stroke modifier, I pass the

--- Page 115 ---
animateStroke variable as an argument to the line width parameter, so
when it does become true, it changes stroke to 25 points (otherwise, it will
be 1 point). Again, we also use the default timing curve inside the
animation modifier, and when we run this, stroke is smoothly modified
from a thickness of 25 points, then back to 1 point when the button is
pressed again.
Here is another example where we are using the trim modifier this time:
struct Trim_Example: View {
    @State private var animateTrim = false
    @State private var circleTrim: CGFloat = 1.0
    
    var body: some View {
        //MARK: - ANIMATE THE TRIM MODIFIER OF A CIRCLE
        VStack {
            Text("ANIMATE TRIM").font(.title).bold()
                .padding(.top, 10)
            Circle()
                .trim(from: 0, to: circleTrim)
                .stroke(Color.red, style: 
StrokeStyle(inewidth:                   30, lineCap: 
CGLineCap.round))
                .frame(height: 150)
                .rotationEffect(.degrees(180))
                .animation(.default, value: animateTrim)
                .padding(.bottom, 20)
            Button("Animate Trim") {
                animateTrim.toggle()
                circleTrim = animateTrim ? 0.25 : 1
            }
        }.font(.title2)
    }
}
The trim modifier takes two parameters: from (meaning what part of the
circle we want to start trimming from) and to (meaning where we want to
end the trimming). The from parameter is set to 0, which means there will
be a complete circle on the screen as we are not trimming yet. The code
produces the following results, a circle that has its line trimmed off and
restored when the button is pressed, as shown in Figure 2.10:

--- Page 116 ---
Figure 2.10: Animating the trim
Also, notice we use two @State variables to work with the trim modifier,
one called animateTrim, to trigger the animation, and one called
circleTrim, which is a numerical value of the CGFloat type. This variable
will hold the amount of circle we want to trim off. Initially, it gets set to 1,
so the whole circle is visible.
Note

--- Page 117 ---
A CGFloat type is a floating-point number. CG stands for Core Graphics,
which is an older coding paradigm was used in Apple’s graphic framework,
but is still used in SwiftUI.
Looking inside the button code, then within the circleTrim variable, we’re
storing one of two values using the ternary operator: either .25, or 1. This
means that when animateTrim toggles to true, the code trims off 75% of
the circle and leaves 25%; when animateTrim toggles to false, the value of
1 is used, which represents 100% of the circle. So, the values in the ternary
operator represent how much of the circle to keep.
If we run the code, we see we have a nice trimming animation of this circle.
The line of code called CGLineCap.round refers to the shape of the line
that’s drawn at the end points, and it can be round, square, or butt line
cap.
And just to have a little fun here, if we go into the trim modifier and
change the from parameter to 0.5 instead of 0, we now start the drawing
halfway through the circle. Run the code, and it looks like we’re animating
or painting a smile and then removing the smile when we press the button
again.
Note
If this code seems a bit confusing, where you see the trim modifier being
set for the circle, and the circleTrim variable being set in the button body,
then think of the trim modifier as the “where” part of the trimming. This
means where do we want to start and end the trimming? Then, think of the
ternary operator inside the button as the “how much,” meaning how much
do we want to trim off the circle and how much of it do we want to keep?
Let’s now move on to the final example. In this example, we will take a
look at how you can animate the corner radius of a rectangle. The corner
radius refers to how sharp you want to make the corners of a rectangle; you
can go all the way from a 90° angle up to a much higher value to create a
smooth, rounded corner.

--- Page 118 ---
All the code is similar to what we’ve used so far except for the use of the
cornerRadius modifier. The following is an example of the code:
struct Corner_Radius_Example: View {
    @State private var animateCornerRadius = false
    
    var body: some View {
        //MARK: - ANIMATE THE CORNER RADIUS
        VStack{
            Text("ANIMATE CORNER RADIUS").font(.title).bold()
                .padding(.top, 30)
            Rectangle()
                .foregroundColor(.green)
                .frame(width: 150, height: 150)
            .cornerRadius(animateCornerRadius ? 0 : 75)
            .animation(.default, value: animateCornerRadius)
            .padding(.bottom, 20)
            Button("Animate Corner Radius") {
                animateCornerRadius.toggle()
            }
        }.font(.title2)
    }
}
This code produces the following results: a rectangle with its corner radius
changed from a 90° angle all the way up to create a circle. So, we’re
changing a rectangle into a circle and back again when the button is
pressed, as shown in Figure 2.11:

--- Page 119 ---
Figure 2.11: Animating the corner radius
In the code, the line that’s doing most of the work is this one:
.cornerRadius(animateCornerRadius ? 0 : 75) 
The animateCornerRadius variable gets passed into the cornerRadius
modifier, which then gets checked for the true or false values; if it is
false, it gets a value of 75 placed into it, which will make the size of this
rectangle animate into a perfectly round circle. And when toggled back to

--- Page 120 ---
true, the circle animates into a rectangle with 90-degree corners by having
its corner radius changed to 0.
Note that the reason why the code creates a perfect circle is that we set the
frame of the rectangle’s width and height to 150 points, thus creating a
square, and anytime you set a corner radius to half the width or height of a
square, you will always get a perfect circle.
SwiftUI gives us more ways to animate objects in addition to these, and we
will explore them in the coming chapters when we start building projects.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at how animations work, the two types of
animation in SwiftUI, implicit and explicit, and many of the properties that
can be animated. These include hue rotation, opacity, a view’s position on
the screen and size, stroke, trim, corner radius, and timing curves.
This was an important step needed to guide you along on your SwiftUI
animations adventure. Remember, if a property is a numerical value, it
almost always can have an animation applied to it.
In the next chapter, we will start working on some projects. For our first
project, we will create an app similar to Apple’s breathing app (very popular
on Apple watches) and learn how to combine more than one animation in a
view.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 121 ---
Creating a Breathing App
So far, we have looked at the SwiftUI fundamentals, some of the modifiers
we can use to alter a view in a certain way, and many of the properties that
can be animated. Now it’s time to put that knowledge to work and build our
first project.
In this chapter, we will build an animation that is similar to the breathing
apps that are popular on Apple watches and iPhones. There will be three
animations that we will combine to make six circle views move, recreating
the slow, rhythmic motions of the Apple app.
There is not a lot of code needed to make this app work; however, as we
move through the book, we will build upon this project and gradually ramp
up the difficulty.
The steps needed to complete the project are as follows:
Technical requirements
You can download the completed project from GitHub in the Chapter 3
folder: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
Setting up the project with Xcode
Adding the variables
Implementing a background color
Adding the circles
Animating the circles

--- Page 122 ---
Setting up the project with Xcode
Let’s start by opening Xcode. Then, choose either the iOS option to just
build your project on an iPhone or choose Multiplatform if you want to
build this project so it runs on an iPhone, iPad, or a Mac. After that, from
the list of templates, choose the one called App, and click Next.
Now, give the project a name. I’m calling mine Animating Circles, but
you can name it whatever you like. Then, fill out the rest of the details on
this page. The two checkboxes can be left unchecked, as we are not using
Core Data or Tests. Finally, select a location to save the project. I usually
just save them on my desktop.
We are then taken to the Xcode interface; you’ll notice that Xcode
automatically imports the SwiftUI framework, so we can get right into our
project.
Adding the variables
Our first task is to add some variables to keep track of the animations.
There will be three animations, so in ContentView, we need three boolean
variables for them. We need to give them an initial value of false, which
will be changed to true when the app first starts up:
struct ContentView: View {
    //animation bools
    @State var scaleUpDown = false
    @State var rotateInOut = false
    @State var moveInOut = false
The variables are called scaleUpDown, rotateInOut, and MoveInOut.
Usually, when you name your variables, you want to make them as
descriptive as possible, so you don’t have to guess what they are used for
and can recognize them right away, as we did here.

--- Page 123 ---
All the variables are now in place, so let’s move on to looking at the
background of our animation.
Implementing a background color
For the background, we will go into the body computed property. This is
where we add our views that will be seen on the screen by the user. The first
thing we want to add is a ZStack; this is the main stack that’s going to hold
all of the views:
var body: some View {
      ZStack {
             }
      }
The reason we use the ZStack versus an HStack or a VStack is we want the
views stacked on each other, so they appear as only one view, and later we
will animate them separately with different modifiers.
Inside the ZStack, let’s set a black background for the screen by using the
.foregroundColor modifier, and specify the color to use; we will use black
in this case:
Rectangle() 
.foregroundColor(Color.black)
The following figure shows the result of that code:

--- Page 124 ---
Figure 3.1: Adding a black background

--- Page 125 ---
As you can see, when adding a background in SwiftUI, it will cover most of
the iPhone screen, but there is an area on an iPhone that is known as the
“safe area.” This is the area reserved for the iPhone notch at the top (the
earpiece area) and the very bottom of the phone where the colored
background can’t reach.
SwiftUI lets us hide the safe areas by using the .edgesIgnoringSafeArea
modifier, then passing in the value .all, which extends the black color to
the edges of the iPhone screen on all sides. To do this, add this line of code
just underneath the .fourgroundColor(Color.black) line you previously
added:
.edgesIgnoringSafeArea(.all)
This produces a completely covered iPhone screen with a black
background, as shown here:

--- Page 126 ---
Figure 3.2: Using the .edgesIgnoringSafeArea modifier

--- Page 127 ---
There are also .vertical, .horizontal, .leading, and .trailing values
that you can use to make the .edgesIgnoringSafeArea modifier more
specific depending on what part of the device you want to be ignored.
So, we’ve set up the background of our animation. Now it’s time to add the
circles.
Adding the circles
Let’s briefly review the goal of this project. We want to make six circles
grow and shrink, and at the same time rotate them, and move them in and
out. The six circles will be overlapping each other, which adds a nice look
as they will be partially translucent.
To make this work, we need some more ZStacks, and then to place the
circles, in pairs, into them. How the circles are aligned in relation to each
other can be likened to the numbers on a clock. Going with this clock
analogy, we need a ZStack to hold the three pairs:
Let’s see how to add these three pairs of circles.
Adding the first pair of circles
The first pair of circles we will add will be placed in the 12 and 6 o’clock
positions. The following is the code we need to accomplish that:
//MARK: - ZStack for the 12 and 6 O'clock circles
            ZStack {
                ZStack {
The first pair of circles will be placed in the 12 and 6 o’clock positions
The second pair of circles will be placed in the 2 and 7 o’clock
positions
The third pair of circles will be placed in the 10 and 4 o’clock
positions

--- Page 128 ---
                    Circle().fill(LinearGradient(gradient: 
                      Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]), 
                      startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom))
                        .frame(width: 120, height: 120)
                        .offset(y: moveInOut ? -60 : 0)
                    
                    Circle().fill(LinearGradient(gradient: 
                      Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]), 
                      startPoint: .bottom, endPoint: .top))
                        .frame(width: 120, height: 120, 
                          alignment: .center)
                        .offset(y: moveInOut ? 60 : 0)
                }.opacity(0.5)
This code creates two circles using the circle shape initializer. Each circle
gets a gradient color that makes them lighter toward the center of the
screen, and darker in the opposite direction. The gradient works by filling
the circles with a smooth transition between two colors. In this case, the
gradient goes from green to white. The LinearGradient struct is used to
create the gradient, and it takes a gradient parameter, which is an instance
of the Gradient struct.
The Gradient struct takes a parameter called colors, which is an array of
color values. In this case, the colors parameter is set to [.green, .white],
which means that the gradient will transition from green to white.
The startPoint and endPoint parameters of the LinearGradient struct
determine the direction of the gradient. The startPoint parameter is set to
.top and the endPoint parameter is set to .bottom for the first circle, which
means that the gradient will start at the top of the circle and go toward the
bottom. For the second circle, the startPoint parameter is set to .bottom
and the endPoint parameter is set to .top, which means that the gradient
will start at the bottom of the circle and go toward the top. The look we are
going for is a whiter shade of green toward the part of the circles that are
just touching each other, and a darker shade of green on the opposite parts
of the circles.
All the circles will be of the same size to start out with, which is 120 points
for the width and height, and that’s accomplished using the frame modifier.
Because we are in a ZStack, the two circles will be stacked on top of each

--- Page 129 ---
other. If you would like to see both circles now, then change the moveInOut
state property to true. The moveInOut property will be changed to true later
when we add the onAppear modifier code, but for now, to see how the UI is
shaping up, go ahead and change that property to true, and this is what you
should see:

--- Page 131 ---
Figure 3.3: Twelve and six o’clock circles
Let’s look at the moveInOut variable now. Remember that I said the naming
of our variables should be descriptive and should be related to what they
do? Well, the moveInOut variable is an example of that descriptive naming,
because it will move the circles in and out of each other. It does this by
controlling the vertical offset of the circles that are contained within the
ZStack. The ternary operator is responsible for setting the moveInOut value
by choosing between two different numbers.
When moveInOut is true, the first circle has a y offset of -60, which moves
it upward by 60 points. The second circle has a y offset of 60, which moves
it downward by 60 points. This results in the two circles moving toward the
top and bottom of the ZStack respectively. When moveInOut is false, the
first circle has a y offset of 0, which keeps it in the center of the ZStack, and
the second circle also has a y offset of 0, which keeps it in the center of the
ZStack as well. This results in the two circles staying in the center,
overlaying each other.
Next, by adding the opacity modifier at the end of the ZStack, both circles
are set to a 50% opacity. This makes it easy to see through them and the
other circles that we will add, as they overlap each other during the
animation, and that also makes for a nice visual as the colors blend together
and darken during the overlap.
Adding the second pair of circles
Now, for the next set of circles, we’re doing almost the exact same thing...
almost. Staying with our clock analogy, we need circles at the 2 and 7
o’clock marks. First, I will show you the code, then I will explain the parts
that are new:
//MARK: - ZStack for the 2 and 7 o'clock circles
                ZStack {
                    Circle().fill(LinearGradient(gradient: 
                      Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]), 
                      startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom))
                        .frame(width: 120, height: 120, 

--- Page 132 ---
                          alignment: .center)
                        .offset(y: moveInOut ? -60 : 0)
                    Circle().fill(LinearGradient(gradient: 
                      Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]), 
                      startPoint: .bottom, endPoint: .top))
                        .frame(width: 120, height: 120, 
                          alignment: .center)
                        .offset(y: moveInOut ? 60 : 0)
                }.opacity(0.5)
                    .rotationEffect(.degrees(60))
We’re creating two circles with a gradient of green and white colors, which
have the same width and height of 120 points, and they get offset by the
animation variable, moveInOut. Again, depending on whether moveInOut is
true or false will determine the placement of the circle. If it’s true, the
circles will separate, and if false, they will come to the middle with one
circle placed over the second circle. Next, we set the opacity of these circles
to 50%, as we did with the first set of circles, to make them slightly
transparent, so we can see them overlap.
What’s different for this set of circles is that we need to use the
rotationEffect modifier on them. This modifier lets us rotate the
placement of the circles by passing in a value for the amount of rotation we
want.
Notice that this modifier is placed on the end of the ZStack that holds the
two circles. This placement will make the entire ZStack and its children
rotate, so it saves us some code as we don’t need to place the modifier on
both child circles individually.
I’m using a value of 60 for the .degrees parameter, which will rotate this
ZStack 60 degrees from the previous pair of circles. The value of 60 for the
rotation is half of 120, which is the width of each circle, so this rotation will
cause the circles to overlap each other by half.
Again, if you want to see how the two pairs of circles look, change the
moveInOut property to true, and this is the result:

--- Page 134 ---
Figure 3.4: Two and seven o’clock circles
Notice that we didn’t have to rotate the first pair of circles using the
rotationEffect modifier; that’s because they’re not overlapping any other
circles as they are the first pair on the screen. If we don’t use the
rotationEffect modifier here, though, this second pair of circles will be
placed exactly over the first pair of circles, and we won’t see them.
Adding the third pair of circles
Finally, for the last pair of circles on our clock, they need to be placed at the
10 and 4 o’clock marks. Here is the code:
  //MARK: - ZStack for the 10 and 4 o'clock circles
                ZStack {
                    Circle().fill(LinearGradient(gradient: 
                      Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]), 
                      startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom))
                        .frame(width: 120, height: 120, 
alignment: .center)
                        .offset(y: moveInOut ? -60 : 0)
                    Circle().fill(LinearGradient(gradient: 
                      Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]), 
                      startPoint: .bottom, endPoint: .top))
                        .frame(width: 120, height: 120, 
                          alignment: .center)
                        .offset(y: moveInOut ? 60 : 0)
                }.opacity(0.5)
                    .rotationEffect(.degrees(120))
Looking at this code, we can again see that very little is different from the
other sets of circles. We’re adding two circles with a gradient of green and
white, and with a size of 120 points. They move in and out 60 points or -60
points on the y axis, as we have seen, but for this pair of circles, we’re
rotating them by 120 degrees, which places them at the 10 and 4 o’clock
positions and completes the clock of circles. The result is shown here:

--- Page 135 ---
Figure 3.5: Ten and four o’clock circles – the complete design

--- Page 136 ---
Okay, so we’ve added all of the circles. Now it’s time to add the fun part –
the animation – and make them move.
Animating the circles
Now we have all our circle pairs in place, it’s time to start animating them.
I’m going to add the animation code. It may look a bit strange at first, but
not to worry, I will explain it line by line:
            //MARK: - Animations
            .rotationEffect(.degrees(rotateInOut ? 90 : 0))
            .scaleEffect(scaleUpDown ? 1 : 1/4)
            .animation(Animation.easeInOut.              repe
atForever(autoreverses: true).speed(1/8), 
              value: scaleInOut)
            .onAppear() {
                rotateInOut.toggle()
                scaleUpDown.toggle()
                moveInOut.toggle()
            }
        }
    }
}
The first line of code calls the rotationEffect modifier. For its .degrees
parameter, I’m passing in the rotateInOut variable, which is then checked
by a ternary operator. The ternary operator has one of two values to choose
from, 90 or 0. If the rotateInOut variable is true, then the
rotationEffect modifier will rotate the ZStack that contains all of the
pairs of circles by 90 degrees. When rotateInOut is false, the
rotationEffect modifier rotates the ZStack back to 0. So, all of the circles
get rotated at once to either 90 degrees or back to zero, depending on the
value that rotateInOut contains.
The next line of code is the scale effect animation. For the scaleEffect
modifier, we pass in another ternary operator that has two values to set,
either 1 or 1/4. When the scaleUpDown property is true, all the circles will
be at full scale, which is reflected by the value 1; otherwise, when the

--- Page 137 ---
scaleUpDown property is false, all the circles will scale down to one-fourth
of their size.
The next line of code calls the .animation function. This is the magic
function that applies the animation to any view we put it on. We are putting
it on the end of the ZStack that contains all of the circles, so when any
values change, for example, the variables change from true to false and
vice versa, then the new values will be applied to the view, which is the
ZStack and its children. Those new values don’t get applied instantly; they
are interpolated over, so the animation happens smoothly and fluidly.
I’m using the easeInEaseOut timing curve type and also adding the
.repeatForever modifier, which will keep the animation going for as long
as the app is running. And by passing the true value to the autoreverses
parameter, the animation reverses itself when it completes its animations in
one direction, so it can continue and animate in the opposite direction.
We can also set the speed of the animation. I’m using 1/8 as the value
inside the .speed modifier, for a relatively slow animation. Since this
project is similar to the familiar breathing app, I thought a slower animation
rather than a faster one would be more appropriate, as the slow pace is
helpful when focusing on breathing.
The value parameter requires one of our @State variables so it can monitor
it for changes. All of the variables we are using are @State, and they will
have their values changed at some point, so any one of them will work fine
in this parameter for this code.
The final part of the project is to change the values in each of our variables
so the animation can work. Remember we looked at different triggers for
animations by using the .onAppear modifier. This will perform an action
when the screen or view first appears and then trigger the animation. The
action we want to perform as soon as the app starts up is to toggle each of
the variables to their opposite states. We gave them initial values of false,
but inside onAppear, they get toggled to true, which starts the animation.
Note

--- Page 138 ---
If you tested out the app earlier and changed the moveInOut variable to
true, make sure to set it back to false again, so the animations will get
triggered in the onAppear modifier.
And now we have three animations happening simultaneously:
Run the application and have a play around with it. The following figure
shows the sequence the animation will take:
The circles are moving in and out from each other. When moving
inward, the circles will overlap each other completely, and when
moving out, they will separate until their edges are just touching. Again,
this animation is monitored by the moveInOut state variable.
The second animation is scaling the circles by using the scaleEffect
modifier. It takes a single parameter, which is a value between 0 and 1
that represents the amount of scaling to be applied. In this case, the
scaleUpDown variable is being used to control the value passed to the
scaleEffect modifier.
The final animation is rotating all of the circles by 90 degrees when
rotateInOut is true, and rotating them back to 0 when rotateInOut is
false.

--- Page 140 ---
Figure 3.6: Animation sequence
The best way to understand how the different modifiers and functions work
is to pass in different values and by experimenting. Always feel free to use
your own creativity for everything – for the parameters, things such as the
color of the gradients, the size of the circles, the speed, the location, the
amount of rotation, and so on. Changing the parameter values to your liking
will give you a better understanding of how each modifier acts on a view.
Later in the book, you will learn how to add sounds and music to a project,
as well as how to add buttons and slider controls. When you know how to
do that, you can come back to this project and tweak it to incorporate some
music, and perhaps a slider to change the speed of the animations. For
example, as this is a breathing app, and some people might want to relax by
taking deep breaths and holding them for a second or more, you can alter
the animation to pause for any amount of time to signify the holding of
one’s breath, all done through the use of various controls that you will learn
about in upcoming projects.
Summary
Great job on the completion of this first project! By creating a breathing
app, you’ve got to explore how to rotate, scale, and move a view to another
location, all by using SwiftUI’s intuitive modifiers and design tools. We
also used a special modifier that does a lot of the work in the background
for us, the .animation modifier, which interpolates over values after we
define a start and end point, and creates a smooth seamless animation from
those values.
In the next chapter, we will continue our journey into animation and build a
record player. This project will look at how to animate a view around one of
its anchor points, rather than from the center, as well as adding sound and a
button to start the animation.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 141 ---
Building a Record Player
In this project, we will create a record player that will move an arm over the
record, make the record spin, and play music when a button is pressed.
Sure, record players are a bit outdated now, but this project is a good way to
learn new techniques about rotation – specifically, how to rotate objects
around an anchor point. And you can always modify the design to look like
a turntable, as many DJs still use vinyl, especially due to the vinyl
resurgence in the last few years.
You might be thinking, didn’t we rotate circles in the first project? Well,
this project is different. In the last project, the rotation animation we applied
was on SwiftUI-created shapes, (specifically, circles), but in this project, we
will be applying a rotation animation onto a photo image, then controlling it
with a button, and mixing in some sounds to add to the user experience.
Before we start, let’s list our objectives for this project:
Technical requirements
You can find the finished project in the Chapter 4 folder on GitHub:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-Applications.
Adding images to the Assets catalog
Creating the record player elements
Combining all the elements into one view
Testing the project

--- Page 142 ---
Adding images to the Assets catalog
Okay, let’s get started on the first objective: adding some images to the
project. First, we need to create a new project in Xcode. I called mine
Record Player (you can copy this name or choose something else if you
like). Then, we need to fill out the other fields exactly as we did in the last
chapter. Once this is done, we are ready to start.
When it comes to the images themselves, we need three: the record, the
record player arm that will move over the record, and a wood grain image
that we can use as the record player box. All of these images can be found
on GitHub by clicking the link provided in the Technical requirements
section.
There are three main methods to add images to the project.
The first method is using Xcode’s special file folder called the Assets
catalog. This is an organizational file structure that you’ll see in the Project
navigator that will hold all of your colors, app icons, and images. Simply
click on the Assets.xcassets file in Xcode and you will be taken to the
Assets catalog. The catalog is split into two sections: the section on the left
is where your files are listed, and the section on the right is where you can
actually see your files when you click on them in the left pane. To bring
your images into the catalog, simply drag them into the left column:

--- Page 143 ---
Figure 4.1: Adding files to the Assets catalog
These images will be accessible by referencing their name in the code we
write (we will see how to do this shortly).
The second method to add image files to the project is just by dragging and
dropping them into the Project navigator. However, this method includes
the extra step of choosing how and where you want to copy the files into the
project via the following pop-up window:

--- Page 144 ---
Figure 4.2: Adding files into the Project navigator
Here, you want to make sure that you tick the checkbox that says Copy
items if needed. That’s important because Xcode will copy your files into
the project, so if they are no longer available on your computer, it won’t
matter, as they are part of your project now.
You also want to make sure that you check the boxes for the specific target
you want to copy those resources to. For example, if you want to build the
app on your Mac, then you want to check the Record Player (macOS)
option in the Add to targets box. If you’re just building it for the iPhone,
then check the Record Player (iOS) option. You can also check both if you
prefer.
The final method is opening the File menu and selecting the Add Files to…
option:

--- Page 146 ---
Figure 4.3: Adding files to the project via the File menu
Now that we have added all the images, the next objective is to create the
record player.
Creating the record player
elements
To create our record player, we will create three separate files, each in
charge of performing specific tasks:
Let’s get started with the first file.
Creating the record player box
To create the file to hold the record player box, in Xcode, open the File
menu, select New, then select File. You will notice that this brings up
several template options:
The first file will hold the record player box
The second file will hold the spinning record, the record player arm,
and the button to control it
The third file will hold the sound file that will play when the record
player animation starts

--- Page 147 ---
Figure 4.4: Creating a new SwiftUI file
Looking at the top of the window, the row of tabs lets you select which
platform you want to write code for. We’re only interested in iOS apps, so
select the iOS tab. Then, under the User Interface heading, select SwiftUI
View.
Click Next, and you will be asked to name the file. I’m calling it
RecordPlayerBox. Make sure your targets are selected in the checkboxes so
that the file and everything it contains will work correctly when you run the
project. Once your targets have been set, click Create.
Now, we have our new file to write our code, and you’ll notice it’s the same
as the ContentView file, except it’s called RecordPlayerBox. Working in
the body property, we will start with a ZStack; this will be our main stack to
hold all of our views. Within the ZStack, we can build a rectangle using one
of the images in the Assets catalog. Enter the following code, and then let’s
look at what it does:

--- Page 148 ---
ZStack {
            Rectangle()
                .frame(width: 345, height: 345)
                .cornerRadius(10)
            Image("woodGrain")
                .resizable().frame(width: 325, height: 325)
                .shadow(color: .white, radius: 3, x: 0, y: 0)
        }
First, we added a Rectangle view, and then, using the frame modifier, it
gets a dimension of 345 points for the width and height, making a square.
Then, using the cornerRadius modifier, we rounded the corners of the
rectangle by 10 points.
The next line of code is the Image initializer, which is a view that displays
an image. We want to use the wood grain image that’s in the Assets catalog,
so we accessed it by typing the image’s name within quotes to create a
string inside the Image initializer. In our case, we typed "woodGrain".
Now we have our image, but we have to resize it. In order to do that, we
need to use the resizable modifier, which is used to prepare an image or
other view to be resized so it fits within its parent view. When it’s applied to
an Image view, the resizable modifier will determine how the image
should be scaled to fit within the space available.
Then, the frame modifier resizes the wood image to a width and height of
325 points. This will make it a little smaller than the Rectangle dimensions;
however, making it smaller will allow some of the rectangle edges to show
through, creating a border. The reason why the border is black is that the
default color for creating a rectangle shape is black, as it is with all shapes.
We can change it to any color we want by using a color modifier, but I
think I’ll leave it black here.
The final line of code creates a shadow by using the shadow modifier.
Again, all the modifiers we are adding are for the wood grain image, so
each modifier placed on the wood grain has its own specific task of
modifying the wood grain image in some way. Since this modifier is placed
on the wood grain image and is using a white color, a white shadow will be

--- Page 149 ---
radiating around the image. Setting the radius to a value of 3 means the
shadow will extend out from the image by 3 points. We can also choose to
put a value in for the x and y parameters, which will move the shadow on
those axes either left, right, up, or down.
How much the shadow is moved depends on the size of the value you put
in. For example, if you put a value of 10 in for the x parameter, the shadow
will extend out from the right edge 10 points; if you put a value of 10 in for
the y parameter, the shadow will extend out 10 points from the bottom edge
of the box. I put in a value of 0 because I want the shadow directly over the
wood grain image; it won’t be shifted left or right or up and down.
Play with these numbers and with the color of the shadow so you can see
how much the values that we’ve used affect the shadow location and
intensity. Don’t expect to see much of a difference with this shadow
modifier yet though, because its color is white, and we’re working over a
white background. When we add a gradient to the whole background later,
the shadow will become more prominent.
Note
You can easily see which modifiers you have on any given view by the way
Xcode indents them. For example, look at the Rectangle view again. Its
two modifiers, frame and cornerRadius, are indented to the right, which
means they are acting on the rectangle only. The same goes for
Image("Woodgrain"); its two modifiers are indented to the right as well.
Here’s a quick shortcut if your code starts to get messy and the indenting is
not lined up: press Command + A to select everything in the file, and then
press Control + I. Xcode then properly indents the whole file, every bit of
code, in one go.
Now, look at Preview to see how your record player box looks. The
following is what I have according to the code we have written:

--- Page 151 ---
Figure 4.5: The finished box
Before we continue, I want to show you how you can alter the previews to
display your creations in a size that fits the view or views on the screen.
Notice in Figure 4.5 that our box is much smaller than the iPhone Preview
screen; sometimes, you might want to preview what you make in a screen
size that fits the size of the view you just made – in our example, we made a
box view. Here is how to shrink the Preview screen down to fit the box
view.
At the bottom of every SwiftUI file is a struct that will have the same name
as the struct we just used to write our code. This is a special struct that is
used for development purposes, and it creates the Preview window that we
need so we can see our work in real time.
Inside the preview struct, add this modifier right at the end of the
RecordPlayerBox() code:
.previewLayout(.sizeThatFits).padding()
Using the sizeThatFits value will bring the Preview window size down to
about the same size as our finished box. I don’t want it exactly the same
size, so I added a bit of padding around it. Here is the result:

--- Page 152 ---
Figure 4.6: The finished box fitting to the Preview screen
By using the previewLayout modifier, you can customize the Preview
window to suit your needs.
And that’s our finished box. Simple, right? Now, with the record player box
done, we can move on to our next objective: creating the spinning record.

--- Page 153 ---
Creating the spinning record
As mentioned earlier, our second file is going to contain the record code.
However, for simplicity’s sake, we’re actually going to make the record
player arm and button in this file too. We could split those tasks up into
separate files as we did with the box, so each part has its own file, but I
think that for this small project, this one file will do the job for us.
Since we are creating three different views in this one file, let’s give it a
name that reflects each view the file will have, so RecordButtonArmView.
Now, do you remember how to make a new SwiftUI file? If not, jump back
to the Creating the record player box section for a refresher. There’s also a
shortcut to creating a new file: simply press Command + N and choose the
file template you want to use; we want the SwiftUI View template from the
options.
With the file made, let’s work on making that spinning record. As we have
done before, we will need properties to make everything work, so working
at the top of the file, within the struct, add the following variables:
    @State private var rotateRecord = false
    @State private var moveArm = false
    @State private var duration = 0.0
    
    var animateForever: Animation {
        Animation.linear(duration: duration)
            .repeatForever(autoreverses: false)
    }
One of these variables is a little different, so let me explain what we’re
doing.
The first three variables are State variables. The rotateRecord variable is
going to keep track of the spinning record and will initiate the spinning
animation when its value changes to true. The next State variable,
moveArm, will keep track of the record player arm, and the third State
variable, duration, is used to set the duration of the spinning record.

--- Page 154 ---
The final variable is a computed property. A computed property is a
property that does not store a value but is, instead, computed every time it is
accessed, meaning the code in its body will run every time the variable is
used. The property we made is of the Animation type, which means we can
use this in the animation modifiers.
By using Animation.linear, we initialize this variable with a linear timing
curve for the animation. Remember we talked about timing curves in
Chapter 2 – a linear curve is a curve with no easing in or easing out; it’s
simply a steady, non-fluctuating animation from the beginning to the
middle, and to the end.
Then, by keeping the duration parameter as 0, this means the animation
will have no duration and cannot start yet. This will change in order to start
the animation later.
Then, we’re using the repeatForever option because we want the spinning
record to keep going until we stop it. And finally, the autoReverses
parameter is set to false, as we don’t want the record to spin backward.
Using a computed property in this way simplifies things, as now we only
need to pass that property into the animation modifier, and four values will
have been set with one computed property: Animation.linear curve,
duration, repeatForever, and autoReverses. A computed property is also
helpful if you are calling the animation modifier in several different places
because rather than changing all the separate places to alter the animation,
you could simply change the variable in one place. For example, if you
want the auto-reverse feature in all of your other animations, all you have to
do is change autoreverses in one place to true.
We now have all the variables we need to set up this file. Next, we will
actually add the record. Let’s first put everything in a main ZStack, which
will hold all the views:
ZStack {
Image("record").resizable()
               .frame(width: 280, height: 280)
               .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: rotateRecord ? 
                 360.0 : 0.0))

--- Page 155 ---
               .animation(animateForever.delay(1.5), value: 
                 rotateRecord)
 }
The first line of code accesses the "record" image in the Assets catalog to
create the record on the screen by using the Image initializer (just as we did
with the "woodGrain" image).
Next, by using the resizable modifier again to initiate the resizing, we can
change the size of the record image by using the frame modifier. Passing in
a value of 280 points for the width and height makes the image just right for
the screen.
In the next line of code, we added the rotationEffect modifier to the
record. This modifier will rotate (or spin) the image to any angle we want.
For the degrees parameter, we’re using the ternary operator and rotating the
record 360 degrees, which is one full rotation. So, the record will spin one
complete revolution, but it will only do so when the rotateRecord variable
becomes true.
Next, we added the animation to the record, by using the animation
modifier and passing in the animateForever computed property for its first
parameter. Remember, this property is doing a few things for us already: it’s
setting a timing curve to linear, making the animation repeat forever, and
stopping the animation from playing in reverse.
Notice the use of the delay modifier. This will add a 1.5-second delay to
the start of the spinning record. This delay is added because old record
players didn’t start spinning until the arm swung over the record first. This
will add a little realism to the animation.
Finally, the animation’s value parameter gets passed in the rotateRecord
variable, which supplies the animation to the record.
Before we move onto the record player arm, let’s make Preview smaller so
it reflects the size of the record, just like we did with the box:
struct RecordButtonArmView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {

--- Page 156 ---
        RecordButtonArmView()
            .previewLayout(.sizeThatFits).padding()
    }
}
Now, the record is complete and ready to spin some tunes. Here’s what it
looks like:
Figure 4.7: Record disk
Nothing will happen yet because we have to add the other views and
functionality, but we’re making good progress. Next up, let’s work on the
record player arm.

--- Page 157 ---
Creating the record player arm
With the spinning record completed, the next objective is the record
player’s arm. Still working in the RecordButtonArmView file, here is the
code I want you to add, just underneath the call to the animation modifier
for the record:
//Arm
            Image("playerArm").resizable()
                .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
                .frame(width: 150, height: 150)
                .shadow(color: .gray, radius: 2, x: 0, y: 0)
                .rotationEffect(Angle.degrees(-35), anchor: 
                  .topTrailing)
                .rotationEffect(Angle.degrees(moveArm ? 8 : 
0),                   anchor: .topTrailing)
                .animation(Animation.linear(duration: 
2),value:                   moveArm)
                .offset(x: 75, y: -30)
Similar to the record image, we use the Image initializer to display the
"playerArm" image that we imported earlier into the Assets catalog. It gets
resizable behaviors using the resizable modifier, and the aspect ratio is set
to fit, which will fit the image proportionally on the screen. Next, the
image’s width and height are set to 150 points, using the frame modifier, as
we have seen before.
Continuing, the next line of code sets a shadow with a gray color and casts
it around the arm with a 2-point radius. If you like, you can change the
radius to whatever size you prefer, and experiment to see what works for
you.
Then, the arm gets rotated by -35 degrees; this value lines it up
perpendicular with the record on the left. Also, we set the anchor point here
to topTrailing, so when the arm swings over the record, the topTrailing
(or top-right) anchor point will not move but will serve as a pivot point for
the whole arm to move.

--- Page 158 ---
The next line of code calls the rotationEffect modifier again – this time,
passing in the moveArm variable. Once this becomes true, the arm will
move 8 points to the left, and when it’s false, it goes back to its original
spot, using a value of 0.
As we have seen, to have an animation, we need the animation modifier,
which is the next line of code. This has a linear timing curve and sets the
animation to 2 seconds to complete, meaning it should take the arm 2
seconds to move over the record.
Finally, we need to position the arm just right in relation to the spinning
record, so using the offset modifier here, we can place it exactly where we
want on the record player box. For our purposes, a record player’s arm is
usually placed to the right of the record, with an inch or two of spacing
between the arm and the record.
Here’s what the project should look like so far with the arm in place:

--- Page 159 ---
Figure 4.8: Record player arm
We’re actually almost done with the project, but two more key components
are needed.
The first of these is a button that will start and stop the animation. This will
be a dynamic button, meaning that the title of the button will change
depending on what it’s doing. If the record player is not playing a record,
we will keep the button color black, display the word Play, and show the
triangular play symbol. If the record player is playing the record, then the

--- Page 160 ---
button will be red, display the word Stop, and show the square stop symbol
instead.
The second component is to add sound to the project. This involves
importing an audio/video framework specifically made for sound and video
files.
Let’s tackle the button component first.
Adding a custom dynamic button
A button is a control that performs an action when triggered. It can be
configured to display a text label, an image, or both. When the user taps it,
an action is sent to its target, which can trigger a method to be executed. So,
let’s add one now.
Still working in the RecordButtonArmView file, as before, I will add the
button code, and then explain how it works:
                 //Button
                Button(action: {
                    rotateRecord.toggle()
                    if rotateRecord {
                        duration = 0.8
                        moveArm = true
                    } else {
                        duration = 0.0
                        moveArm = false
\                    }
                }) {
                    HStack() {
                        if !rotateRecord {
                            Text("Play").bold().             
                 foregroundColor(Color.black)
                            Image(systemName: 
"play.circle.                              fill").foregroundC
olor(Color.                              black)
                        } else {
                            Text("Stop").bold().             
                 foregroundColor(Color.black)
                            Image(systemName: 
"stop.fill").                              foregroundColor(Co

--- Page 161 ---
lor.red)
                        }
                    }
                    .padding(.horizontal, 10)
                    .padding(.vertical, 5)
                    .background(Capsule().strokeBorder(Color.
                      black, lineWidth: 2.00))
                }.offset(x: -105, y: 135)
The Button control has an action parameter, and this is where we put the
code that we want to be executed when the button is pressed. Inside this
action closure, we toggled the rotateRecord variable before doing
anything else. The reason for this is that we want the button to change the
state of the variable because that’s the one that controls the spinning record.
So, by toggling it, we’re changing the state right away.
Next, we checked to see what the state of rotateRecord is when using an
if else statement. If it’s true, we set the duration variable to 0.8 seconds,
as that’s how long we want it to take for the record to spin one revolution
(this is a good speed for producing a spinning record effect). Next, we want
to set the moveArm variable to true when the button is pressed, because
setting that to true gets the arm to move over the record by 8 degrees.
All of that happens if rotateRecord is true, but if it’s false, the code falls
into the else block. In the else block, the duration is set to 0, which
effectively stops the record from spinning, and moveArm is set to false,
which will allow the arm to animate back to its original starting position:
off the record, and to the right side.
Then, we move into the labeling part of the button. Within this initializer, I
declared an HStack, and inside there, another if else statement. I’m using
the not operator (!) in front of the rotateRecord variable too, which will
read like this: if the rotateRecord variable is not true (this is another way
of saying the variable is false), then the record is not playing, so set the
text for the button to the word "Play", make it bold and black, and provide
a system image for it (a triangular play button). But if the code falls into the
else block here, it means the record is spinning; in this case, we want to
make the text bold, change the foreground color to red, and provide a
system image of a stop button.

--- Page 162 ---
To finish off the button, we added a little bit of padding on its horizontal
and vertical sides, gave it a capsule shape, and used the strokeBorder
modifier to put a 2-point black line around the button.
Note
You might be wondering, why use the not operator (!) when you can say if
false instead? You can use the if false statement instead of if !true,
but the ! operator can help to make your code more readable. For example,
consider the following code:
if !fingerprintAccepted {
//access granted
} else {
//access denied
}
The ! operator negates the Boolean value, making the code more readable
because it emphasizes the opposite of what is expected. In the example, if
fingerprintAccepted is false, access will be granted. If
fingerprintAccepted is true, access will be denied. The ! operator makes
it clear that the code is checking for the opposite of fingerprintAccepted.
With that code placed into your project, the current interface should look
like this:

--- Page 163 ---
Figure 4.9: Adding the button control
Now, there’s a Play button to control the record. Next up, we want our
record player animation to actually play sound, so let’s do that.

--- Page 164 ---
Creating a sound file to play audio
Now, we are going to add sound to the project so that it plays when the
record spins. To do this, navigate back to the GitHub folder for this project
and drag the .m4a file called music into the Project navigator. Make sure to
check the Copy files to project box if that box is unchecked.
With our .m4a audio file, we need to create a separate Swift file for this
sound. Press Command + N to create a new file, but instead of creating a
SwiftUI View file, we will create a simple Swift file instead. Then, name it
PlaySound.
Note
The main difference between a SwiftUI View file and Swift file is the
purpose of the code contained in the file. A SwiftUI View file contains the
code needed to define a view and its layout, while Swift file can contain a
wide range of code that is not specifically related to defining views.
In this file, the first thing we need to do is import the AVFoundation
framework:
import AVFoundation
The AVFoundation framework includes classes and methods that allow
developers to manipulate and work with audio and video in their apps.
Next, let’s instantiate (create) an audio player:
var audioPlayer: AVAudioPlayer?
Notice that this variable is an optional type, denoted by a question mark at
the end. I made it optional because if for any reason the music file cannot
be found within the project, it will stop the app from crashing. Instead, the
app will still work but simply won’t play the music.

--- Page 165 ---
Now, let’s now create a function called playSound that will search through
the project for the audio file, and load it if it finds it:
func playSound(sound: String, type: String) {
    if let path = Bundle.main.path(forResource: sound, 
ofType: type) {
        do {
            audioPlayer = try AVAudioPlayer(contentsOf: 
              URL(fileURLWithPath: path))
            audioPlayer?.play()
        } catch {
            print("Could not find and play the sound file")
        }
    }
}
Here’s how the function works. It has two parameters, both of which are
strings: one is called sound and the other is called type.
The first thing we do is to create a path constant using what is called
optional binding with an if let statement. Optional binding is a feature
that lets us check the value of an optional, and if there is a value in it
(meaning it’s not nil), then bind that optional to a variable or constant.
This constant called path will be assigned a path from the app’s bundle.
The bundle is where the app and its resources are stored, and we need to get
the path to the sound file that we added to the project, which is in the app’s
bundle. We can access the main bundle of the app by using the
Bundle.main property. This property returns a Bundle object that represents
the main bundle of the app, and we can use this object to access any of the
resources in the app, such as images, sounds, or other files.
So, the if let statement reads as follows: the code searches the main
bundle for a file with the given sound’s name and type extension. If found,
the file path is stored in the path constant and runs the code in the do block.
Otherwise, if for whatever reason the path to the file can’t be found, then
the file we are looking for is missing or corrupt, and the flow of the
program will proceed into the catch block and execute the code there.

--- Page 166 ---
Okay, let’s assume the file path has found our sound file, then the code
moves into the do block, in which the code will try to create an audio player
using that path constant. If that is successful, then it will try to play that
file. But again, if for any reason the file can’t be played, the code will then
fall into the catch block and print an error message to the console ("Could
not find and play the sound file"). That error message won’t be
shown to the user, it’s only for our debugging purposes, but the user’s app
won’t crash with this code in place; the sound just won’t play.
Note
Here, it would be helpful to show the user an alert if we fall into the catch
block; however, we won’t do that just yet. If you would like to do this, we
will cover this in Chapter 12, where we create a word game.
Okay, we have everything in place to test the app, but before we can do
that, we need to combine our three files – the RecordPlayerBox,
RecordButtonArmView, and PlaySound files – into one unified view.
Combining all the elements into
one view
To put all of our finished views together into one unified grouping to make
the finished project, let’s go back into the ContentView file and add the
following code:
struct ContentView : View {
    var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            //MARK: - ADD THE GRADIENT BACKGROUND
            RadialGradient(gradient: Gradient(colors: 
[.white,              .black]), center: .center, 
startRadius: 20,              endRadius: 600)
                .scaleEffect(1.2)
                //.ignoresSafeArea()
            //MARK: - ADD THE RECORD PLAYER BOX
            RecordPlayerBox()
            

--- Page 167 ---
            //MARK: - ADD THE RECORD, THE BUTTON, AND THE ARM
                RecordButtonArmView()
        }
    }
}
Again, we’re using ZStack as the main view because we want to layer our
other views on top of each other.
First, let’s look at the RadialGradient view. This is a struct that takes an
array of colors that are placed one by one between the open and closed
brackets. Within those brackets, you can put as many colors as you want,
separating each color by a comma (I’m using two colors: white and black).
The RadialGradient view works by using the first color in the array to
color the center of the background, and subsequent colors will surround that
center. Using startRadius and endRadius values of 20 and 600,
respectively, will make the radial gradient expand to cover the entire screen;
however, it doesn’t include the safe areas of the iPhone (again, those are
that little area by the notch at the top and a small area at the bottom of the
phone). We can handle the safe areas in two ways: we can use the
ignoreSafeArea modifier as we’ve done before, or we can use the
scaleEffect modifier as we are doing here. By passing in 1.2 as a value
for the scaleEffect modifier, the gradient scales up 1.2 times the size of
the iPhone screen, covering all the edges. This is effectively doing the same
thing as the ignoreSafeArea modifier would do.
The next line of code makes a call to the RecordPlayerBox view and places
it over the gradient (remember that we are working in ZStack, so views get
stacked up onto one another). The final line of code makes a call to
RecordButtonArmView, placing it over the box, to complete the interface.
This is how our project will look (if you didn’t make any modifications
along the way, that is):

--- Page 168 ---
Figure 4.10: The finished interface
The final piece of the puzzle is to use the sound file that we created. This is
easy to do, so as a challenge, try and think of where you would place the
audio code to get the app to play music.
Did you figure it out? If you thought of putting code into the body of the
button, then you are correct! The button is the view that controls the action:

--- Page 169 ---
it gets the arm to swing over the record, and the record to spin, as well. So,
inside the RecordButtonArmView file, and then inside the button’s if
statement, add the following code:
playSound(sound: "music", type: "m4a")
This line of code calls the function that we made in the PlaySound file,
passing in the name of our music file, which is simply called music, and the
file extension for the type parameter, which is m4a. When the button is
pressed, it means the user wants to spin the record and play the music, and
this code will grab the music file and play it.
When the button is pressed again, that means the user wants to stop the
music, so we need to add the following code to the else block to do just
that:
audioPlayer?.stop()
This line of code calls the audio player that we created and uses the stop
function to stop the music. Notice the use of the question mark before
calling the stop function. That’s because the audioPlayer variable was
created as an optional. When we create optional variables, we need to use
the question mark or exclamation mark when using them too.
Testing the project
And with that, the project is done. Let’s come back to ContentView and test
everything out. If you hit the Play button in the Preview window or run it
in the simulator, you should see that the record won’t start spinning until the
player’s arm is directly over the record. As the record starts spinning, you
should hear a golden oldy from the big band era of the 40s, complete with
the scratchy intro sound that old records were notoriously famous for. You
will also notice that the text on the button changes from Play to Stop, and
the color of the button changes from black to red, as shown in this figure:

--- Page 171 ---
Figure 4.11: The spinning record
When you press Stop, the arm goes back to its original place, the record
stops, and the Play button will reappear again.
After all of that, that completes our second project!
Summary
To recap what we covered in this project, we added images to the Assets
catalog and accessed them in our code. Then, we created three separate files
to hold the elements that we need – one to hold the record player box; one
to hold the spinning record, the arm moved with an anchor point, and a
dynamic button; and one in which we wrote code to access a sound file.
Once we created these elements, we merged them into one view, to create a
record and animated record player.
In the next chapter, we’re going to continue working with Swift animations
by exploring colors. We will create a simple project that displays various
images and then, using hueRotation, change the color of the images to
display a kaleidoscope effect. We will also look at how to pass data
bidirectionally to another view, which gives up more flexibility than using
the @State property wrapper.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 172 ---
Animating Colorful Kaleidoscope
Effects
In this chapter, we will look at how we can animate colors with a modifier
called hueRotation, where “hue” refers to the colors of the object, and
“rotation” refers to the colors being rotated or animated. We will create a
simple project that displays various images and then, using hueRotation,
we can change or shift the colors of the images so that they will resemble
somewhat of a kaleidoscope effect.
Along with hueRotation, there are some other important concepts we will
explore in this project.
We will work with a Picker view for the first time, which is exactly what
the name suggests; it lets the user pick from a variety of options, which can
then be displayed on the screen.
Also, we will look at how to pass data bidirectionally to another view. If
you remember the moving circle project in Chapter 3, it was built inside
one file and then within one view, the ContentView. In Chapter 4, we built
the record player using several files and then put those files together inside
the ContentView. In both of those projects, we didn’t pass any data from
file to file or view to view; the views contained blocks of code that just
needed to be called in the main ContentView. But in this project, we will
see how to pass data from different views using a special property wrapper
called @Binding.
So, let’s lay out the objectives before we dive in:
Adding the Binding variable and images
Adding a Picker control and using a ForEach view
Adding the variables and background color
Adding the Image view and using the hueRotation modifier

--- Page 173 ---
Technical requirements
You can find the completed project and the images we will use in the
Chapter 5 folder over on GitHub at
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-Applications.
Adding the Binding variable and
images
Okay, let’s get started. So, create a new Xcode project, give it a name, and
we will get underway.
We will start by adding a new SwiftUI file to the project, which I’ll call
ImagePickerView (you should be very familiar with the process of adding
new files as you've done it several times now). Then within the struct, add a
variable called selectedImage, and make it of the String type. We will
prefix this variable with the @Binding wrapper, as shown here:
struct ImagePickerView: View { 
    @Binding var selectedImage: String 
    var body: some View { 
        Text("Hello World") 
    } 
} 
The @Binding property wrapper is used to create a two-way binding
between a source of truth (for example, a state property in a parent view)
and a view that depends on that state. This ImagePickerView is the source
of truth as it’s the parent view here. The @Binding wrapper allows a view to
read and write to a value, but also makes sure that any changes made to the
value are propagated back to the original source of truth. This is how views
can be updated and re-rendered automatically whenever the source of truth
changes, without having to manually pass down new values and refresh the
view.

--- Page 174 ---
Let’s now add some images that we need to the project. You can find them
in the GitHub repository – just download the resources for this chapter.
There are five images: ornament, landscape, dog, dice, and cat. Open the
Assets catalog and drop the five images into the catalog (just like we did
when creating the record player).
With the images in place, let’s create an array of strings that can hold the
names of the images. Here is the code, which gets placed under the
@Binding property:
struct ImagePickerView: View { 
    @Binding var selectedImage: String 
    let images: [String] = ["ornament", "landscape", "dog", 
      "dice", "cat"] 
     
    var body: some View { 
        Text("Hello World") 
    } 
} 
To create the array, we first give it a name, images, then use the String
keyword within square brackets, then another pair of square brackets in
which we fill the images array with five String elements, which are the
names of the images we want to use. Each string is separated by a comma.
Now the images array is ready to use. Let’s add a Picker control and see
how we can loop through this array using a ForEach view to store each
string name in the picker.
Adding a Picker control and using
a ForEach view
SwiftUI offers us a sufficient number of pre-built controls to help put
together a user interface that is both nice to look at and very functional. One
control that is useful for providing your user with a list of options is the
Picker view, which can provide as few or as many values as you need to
display for your app. A Picker view is a view that lets the user select an item

--- Page 175 ---
from a list of options and is usually used together with a Binding variable,
which will store the currently selected value.
We will be using a forEach view to iterate through the images array and
populate the picker. Working in the body property, let’s add the PickerView
first, and a ForEach view inside the picker:
struct ImagePickerView: View { 
    @Binding var selectedImage: String 
    let images: [String] = ["ornament", "landscape", "dog", 
      "dice", "cat"]
    var body: some View { 
        Picker("", selection: $selectedImage) { 
            ForEach(images, id: \.self) { value in 
                Text(value) 
                    .foregroundColor(.white) 
            } 
        }
Okay, there’s a lot going on here, so let’s break it down. Quick note though:
don’t worry about the preview struct below the ImagePickerView just yet;
that’s going to show an error, but we’ll fix that in a moment.
For the Picker’s first parameter, you’ll notice there’s an empty String
value. The string will allow you to give the Picker a label if you think it
needs one; however, we do not need it here so we’re leaving the String
parameter empty. Inside the next parameter, called selection, is where the
selectedImage binding property will go, and this property will bind to a
State property in the ContentView later. We haven’t added any State
properties in the ContentView yet, but we will soon.
Now the selectedImage property in this ImagePickerView file will be
bidirectionally connected to a State property in the ContentView. That
connection allows for the instant refreshing of views between those two
structs when the value changes in either struct.
The syntax does require that we put the dollar sign ($) before the property
in order to tell SwiftUI that this property is a binding property and can
connect to the ContentView (the source of truth) and update the views.

--- Page 176 ---
The next line of code is the ForEach view. What we want to do is loop
through the images array and display all those String labels of that array in
the Picker view. In order to loop through the array of strings, they need to
have some sort of ID that identifies each element in this array uniquely. And
since they all have different names, why not use the names of each element,
which already constitute unique IDs? To use each image’s name as an ID
for the loop, we used the \.self syntax, placed after the images array.
The value keyword in this code is the looping variable; it will store each
element from the images array as the ForEach view loops through them.
This looping variable can be named anything you like, but I called it value
in this example as that makes the most sense (it temporarily holds the value
of each element in the array, one at a time).
Now looking at the code in the ForEach view’s body, we only need to add
one Text view with the value variable inside it. That will display
everything that is in the images array in the PickerView. Next, we change
the color of the text to white using the foregroundColor modifier. We do
this because when we go into the ContentView file, we will make the
screen’s background black; that way, we’ll see the white letters over the
black background.
That completes the Picker view functionality; let’s now style the
appearance of the Picker view by adding some modifiers to it after the
view’s closing bracket:
        }.pickerStyle(WheelPickerStyle())         
        .frame(width: 300, height: 150)
        .background(Color.red.colorMultiply(.blue))
        .cornerRadius(20)
        .shadow(color: .white, radius: 5, x: 0, y: 0 )
Let’s look at each of the modifiers used:
The first modifier I’ve added is pickerStyle(), which is used to
change the appearance of the Picker view. There are four built-in styles
we can select from to style the Picker using the pickerStyle()
modifier. The following are the ones available:

--- Page 177 ---
We chose the WheelPickerStyle for this project.
Now, let’s return to the error that our code is experiencing and see how we
can make sure the app builds cleanly. The error says that we are missing an
argument from the ImagePickerView’s call. And that’s true, because we
added a Binding property into the ImagePickerView struct called
selectedImage, and since the Preview struct is referencing the
DefaultPickerStyle(): The default style that is chosen
automatically by the system based on the platform and current
context. This presents the choices to the user in a menu style.
PopUpButtonPickerStyle(): This is a pop-up button-style picker,
often used on macOS. This presents the choices in a button style to
the user.
WheelPickerStyle(): A wheel-style picker, often used on iOS.
This presents the choices in a wheel style to the user.
SegmentedPickerStyle(): A segmented control-style picker,
commonly used on iOS, watchOS, and tvOS. This presents the
choices in the style of a segmented button to the user.
The second modifier is the frame modifier, which sets the dimensions
of the picker control. Here, we set the dimensions as 300 points wide
and 150 points tall.
Next is the background modifier, which sets the background color of
the picker to red. colorMultiply then modifies the red color instance
by multiplying its RGB values with those of another color, blue in this
case. The result is a dark shade of purple.
After that, we used the cornerRadius modifier to round the corners of
the picker by 20 points.
We finish styling the picker using the shadow modifier. This will add a
white shadow with a radius of 5 points and will be visible when we
change the background to black.

--- Page 178 ---
ImagePickerView, it needs to use that Binding variable in itself too in order
to build cleanly.
To fix this problem, we need to go into the Previews struct at the bottom of
the file and change the first line of code to this:
ImagePickerView(selectedImage: .constant("ornament")) 
By using the constant function, the error goes away. The constant
function will accept any value we want as long as it’s of the String type,
because that’s the data type of the selectedImage property. I’m using the
"ornament" string from the images array, and that string will be shown in
the picker.
Now that the code builds cleanly, the result should look like this:
Figure 5.1: Picker View
Spin the wheel picker and you can see all of the string names from the
images array.

--- Page 179 ---
Now that we are done with the ImagePickerView file, let’s continue by
setting up the ContentView file.
Adding the variables and
background color
Moving into the ContentView file now, our first task here will be to add a
couple of variables and a constant. Let’s start with adding a variable that
will bind to the selectedImage binding property in the ImagePickerView
file.
To do that, we need to create a State variable, which needs to be the same
data type as the selectedImage variable, a String type. We can give it the
same name as the variable too, selectedImage, so that you know this
variable is bidirectionally linked to the variable in the ImagePickerView
file.
Add this code inside the ContentView struct, at the top:
    @State private var selectedImage: String = "ornament" 
    @State private var shiftColors = false 
    let backgroundColor = Color(.black) 
The selectedImage variable gets set to a String value called ornament.
Next is a variable to track the animation called shiftColors, which is set to
false. Finally, we have a constant to hold the background color, which will
be black.
Moving into the body property, let’s add a VStack, which will take care of
vertically organizing three views that the user interface needs: a
background, which will be black; an Image view, to display the image
selected by the user; and a call to the ImagePickerView that we created in
the ImagePickerView file, which allows the user to select an image.
To do all of this, first add a VStack into the body property of the
ContentView:

--- Page 180 ---
var body: some View {
VStack {
       }
}
Next, add the ImagePickerView into the VStack with the frame modifier on
it, as shown here:
var body: some View {
    VStack {
          ImagePickerView(selectedImage: $selectedImage)
          .frame(width: 350, height: 200)
        }
To color the background, we need a ZStack so it can overlay the color onto
the whole screen. Add this code inside the VStack:
  ZStack {
        backgroundColor
           .scaleEffect(1.4)
       }
}
As we have seen before, this code will color the background black, and by
using the scaleEffect modifier and passing in the value of 1.4, the black
background will stretch out so it covers the entire screen.
Now that the background is set, let’s add an Image view to display the
images, and then start animating some colors.
Adding the Image view and using
the hueRotation modifier
With the background set up and all of the variables in place, let’s add an
ImageView to display the images, and add the hueRotation modifier to it.
Add the following code right after the scaleEffect modifier:

--- Page 181 ---
Image(selectedImage).resizable().padding(20).frame(width: 
  400, height: 400) 
    .hueRotation(.degrees(shiftColors ? 360 : 0)) 
    .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
      2).delay(0.3).repeatForever(autoreverses: true), 
      value: shiftColors)
    .onAppear() {
        shiftColors.toggle()
                }
            } 
            ImagePickerView(selectedImage: $selectedImage) 
                .frame(width: 350, height: 200) 
        }.background(backgroundColor) 
        .edgesIgnoringSafeArea(.bottom) 
    } 
} 
Here we are using the Image view to display the images on the screen,
resizing it and adding a little padding to it. Then we set the frame of the
image view to a size of 400 by 400.
Next comes the hueRotation modifier. Hue rotation is an image-processing
effect that adjusts the hue of an image by rotating the colors in the hue color
wheel by a specified angle. It changes the overall color tone of an image by
shifting the hue of each pixel.
The speed at which it does this is determined by the values that get passed
into its parameter. And if you have an image with many different colors,
then hueRotation will cycle through and rotate all of them, creating a sort
of kaleidoscope color effect.
Looking at the hueRotation parameter, it needs a value to represent
degrees, which is for the amount of rotation to apply to the colors in this
view, and that is handled by the degrees function. Inside the degrees
function is a ternary operator, which will select from two choices: either a
value of 360 when the shiftColors variable is true, or 0 when it is false.
Next, the animation modifier is added to animate to the color-changing
effect. It uses an easeInOut timing curve with a duration of 2 seconds to
complete the animation and a delay of 0.3 seconds between animations.

--- Page 182 ---
Then we use the onAppear modifier, which runs the code within its body as
soon as the view appears. This is a perfect place to trigger the animation by
toggling the shiftColors variable to its opposite value.
After that, we set a frame width and height of 350 by 200 for the
ImagePickerView and colored the background of the VStack by using our
background variable. We also used edgesIgnoringSafeArea for the bottom
edges, so the background color will go below the screen. We want the
whole screen black with our views on top of it, and this code does just that.
Guess what? With all that finished, the project is done! Here’s what it
should look like:

--- Page 184 ---
Figure 5.2: Finished project
Go ahead and run the project – you’ll see that the colors from your selected
image will all shift and rotate over the span of 2 seconds.
Summary
Good work on completing the project! As you worked through it, you got to
see how to use a Binding property so data can be bound between views, the
Picker view, a view with different styles that allows users to select an
image or other data, and finally the hueRotation modifier, which rotates
colors.
In the next chapter, we will explore the process of cutting up an image into
different parts, then rotating those separate parts using the rotationEffect
modifier, to create an animation of a girl on a swing.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 185 ---
Animating a Girl on a Swing
Welcome to the next project. In this one, we’re going to animate parts of an
image, specifically an image of a girl on a swing, and make those individual
parts move with a natural motion.
To do this, we’re going to take a look at an animating technique that uses
any image or vector file of a subject and then cuts that image up into
various parts in order to animate them separately. We will also take a look at
a new modifier called mask, which is used for setting the opacity of a view.
Let’s take a look at what we will learn in this project:
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and the finished project from the Chapter
6 folder on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-
SwiftUI-Applications.
Gathering and slicing images
In this project, I will be using some simple graphics, including an image of
a girl, a leafy background, and a branch. And, as I mentioned, we will be
animating two parts of the scene: the swing and the girl’s legs.
The first thing you need to do is download the images as explained in the
Technical requirements section and then cut the images into various parts.
Gathering and slicing images
Adding animating variables
Adding images to the scene
Using the mask modifier

--- Page 186 ---
To do this, I will simply use Mac’s Preview app, which is a free app that’s
already installed on your Mac computer. Inside this app, there is an option
called Markup, as shown here:
Figure 6.1: Accessing the Markup tools
Clicking on Markup will open up an array of helpful editing tools that we
can use to transform an image in unique ways. One of the best tools for
cutting images is the Lasso Selection tool, which lets us draw a selection
box around some or all of the parts of the image, and either cut it out or
copy it to another window. You can find the tool in the drop-down menu
located here:
Figure 6.2: Accessing the Lasso Selection tool
To use it, click and drag your cursor around any object, and then connect
the start and end points when you’re done. We want to drag the lasso around
the girl’s lower legs, just above the knee joint, like so:

--- Page 187 ---
Figure 6.3: Using the Lasso Selection tool [Credit: <a
href=”https://www.freepik.com/vectors/clip-art”>Clip art vector created by
brgfx - www.freepik.com</a>]
With the legs selected using the Lasso Selection tool, copy the selection by
pressing Command + C. Now they are saved to the Mac clipboard. To make
that copy into a separate image, go to File, and select New from
Clipboard. Save the PNG to your desktop and rename it leg. Your image
will look something like this:

--- Page 188 ---
Figure 6.4: Separating the leg with the Lasso Selection tool
This image is okay, but there’s a problem. The image contains a background
that won’t look good in the scene; we only want the leg without any
background. The best way I have found to remove backgrounds is to use a
helpful free online tool called removebg, which you can access here:
https://www.remove.bg/upload. Simply drop the image onto that website,
and it identifies the background and removes it.
At this point, we now have our image of a leg (though our animation
includes two legs, one image will work just fine to represent both legs of
the girl).
Next in our project, we also want a piece of rope, which we will use to tie
the swing to the tree in our background image. However, if you look at
Figure 6.3, the rope is a little too short for what we need. To get an extra
piece of rope, I used the Lasso Selection tool around the rope, copied it,
and made a new image, then removed the background with removebg (as
we did with the leg). Figure 6.5 is the result; this is what we will use in the
scene to extend the existing rope:

--- Page 189 ---
Figure 6.5: Rope
Next, I looked for a suitable background, which was a tree with some grass
and a sky. Here is the one we will use (it originally had a tire swing;
however, I didn’t want that kind of swing, so I removed it using some other
software called Affinity Photo). Now we have a tree and we can tie a swing
to its branch:

--- Page 190 ---
Figure 6.6: Our background image
[Credit: https://www.istockphoto.com/vector/tire-swing-in-autumn-
gm165677003-10337433?phrase=tyre%20swing]
I also thought the tree was a little sparse, so I found some leaves that can be
positioned onto the branch later, and they will also hide the top part of the
rope:

--- Page 191 ---
Figure 6.7: Our leaves image
As you play around with slicing up images and making the individual parts
to animate, you may find that you want something better than Mac’s
Preview app. You may also find that, even though removebg works in most
cases, it may not work in every instance. If so, you can use professional
software such as Photoshop; however, that can be expensive. Instead, you
can try my favorite image editing software that I mentioned earlier, Affinity
Designer and Affinity Photo. They are very reasonably priced and as robust
as Photoshop, but they are much more user-friendly. Definitely take a look
at them if you want to learn how to manipulate images that you can use in
an iOS app without paying a yearly subscription, as you would for
Photoshop.
Once we have all the parts we need for the girl in the swing scene, we can
start assembling it in Xcode. So, create a new project – I have called mine
Girl On A Swing – then open the Assets catalog and drop all the images
inside as we have done before.

--- Page 192 ---
Now we can start coding in the ContentView file; this is the only file we
need for this project as there is very little code required to make this project
work.
Adding the animating variables
As we have done before, we start off by adding the properties needed to
keep track of the different parts we want to animate. In our case, we need
three properties:
Even though we are using one image for both the right and left legs, we still
need two separate leg properties for the animation to work because the legs
will be moving at different times and speeds.
All of these properties will be State properties, so they will update the
view instantly as their values change. Put the following code into the
ContentView file, just above the body property:
    @State private var girl = false
    @State private var leftLeg = false
    @State private var rightLeg = false
As usual, all the properties are all set to false so the animation won’t start
until they are changed to true.
We’re also going to add a fourth property, which I’m calling fadeOutRope.
This isn’t strictly necessary, but it gives me an opportunity to show you how
to use the mask modifier, which masks a view by changing its opacity; if we
pass in a gradient color, we can make the rope fade out as it reaches the tree
branch. Here is the property I want you to add under the previous ones:
One property for the girl image, aptly called girl
One for the left leg, called leftLeg
One for the right leg, called rightLeg

--- Page 193 ---
let fadeOutRope = Gradient(colors: [.clear, .black])
The Gradient function needs an array of colors to work, so I gave it two
colors: a clear color (or non-color), and a black color. These two colors
will be blended together into the rope image, making the top portion fade
out. As I said, this is not strictly necessary; however, I think it’s better to
fade out the top of the rope because it’s not tied to the branch of the tree in
the image we are using, so we want to blend it in a little bit, giving the
appearance that it is attached somewhere in the tree. Later, we will use the
mask modifier, add an image of some leaves to help conceal the top of the
rope, and make the scene look even more natural.
Adding the images to the scene
There are four images we need to add to our scene, which we will add in the
following order:
So, let’s get started!
Adding the background
We’ll add the background inside a ZStack, this will be the first view in the
file, and so all subsequent views will be placed on top of this. Here is the
code you need:
var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            Image("tree").resizable()
                .frame(width: 550, height: 900)
The background
The right leg
The girl
The left leg

--- Page 194 ---
               }
            }
In ZStack, we call the Image initializer and pass in the tree string. Next, we
use the resizable modifier to resize the tree, and then set the frame of the
background to a width of 550 and a height of 900 so the background image
can extend to the edges of an iPhone of any size.
Adding the right leg
When it comes to adding the rightleg, leftleg, and girl properties, we
need another ZStack so we can layer all of the views on top of each other,
then use the offset modifier to move them into place as needed.
To add the right leg to the scene, enter the following code:
 ZStack {
    ///right leg
    Image("leg").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        .rotationEffect(.degrees(rightLeg ? -20 : 50),
          anchor: .topTrailing )
        .scaleEffect(0.12)
        .offset(x: -448, y: 92)
        .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
          1).delay(0.09).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),
          value: rightLeg)
        .onAppear() {
            rightLeg.toggle()
        }
     }
First, the Image initializer gets passed into it the name of the image we want
to display; here, it’s "leg". Remember, we are using this one image to
represent the right and left legs (we can get away with using a single image
because this is a 2D scene; we don’t have a 3D view around the image, so
we can’t really see any variance in each leg).
Next, we will use the resizable modifier and set the aspect ratio to fit.
Using the fit option resizes the image content to use all the available
screen space, both vertically and horizontally.

--- Page 195 ---
The next line of code sets the rotationEffect on the leg. The right leg will
be rotated by -20 degrees when the rightLeg property is true, and it will
rotate 50 degrees when it is false.
Notice the anchor parameter too? An anchor point is the point around
which the image will rotate. When thinking about humans (and animals
too), our anchor points are our joints. We bend and move from those joints,
our pivot points. In our project, by using the topTrailing option, the leg
will rotate about the knee joint.
Note
If you type a dot (.) into your code, you can see the other options Xcode
offers for your anchor point.
After that, we need to scale the image down to a usable size. As it is, it’s too
big for the screen, so by using the scaleEffect modifier, we have scaled it
down to 12 percent of its original size. For our scene, that’s a nice fit.
The next line of code uses the offset modifier to place the right leg in the
exact location we need. It needs to be placed at the knee joint of the girl
image, which I worked out to be a value of -448 for the x-axis and 92 for
the y-axis. Arriving at those coordinates is really just a matter of trial and
error. For example, if you want to move the part up on the screen, add a
smaller number for the y position, and if you want to move the image to
right, add a larger number for the x position.
Finally, we get to the animation, most of which we have seen before. Here,
the animation modifier does the work of moving the leg, with a duration
of 1 second, which is the time it takes for the animation to finish. Also,
using a slight delay of .09 seconds will give a more random look to the
animation as we will set the left leg to a different delay.
As well as this, we want the animation to repeat forever, or at least until the
user stops the app, so that’s why the repeatForever function is used. The
autoReverse parameter has a value of true because we want the animation
to go forward in one direction, finish, reverse itself, and continue in the

--- Page 196 ---
opposite direction. Also, the animation modifier needs a property for its
value parameter, and for that, we pass the rightLeg property into it.
The final part of this code is the onAppear modifier. This modifier is used to
run code when the view appears on the screen, hence the name onAppear. In
body, we toggle the rightLeg property to true to activate the animation.
Now, having a leg on the screen that is animating back and forth is not
really the look we are going for, so let’s add the girl now, followed by the
left leg.
Adding the girl
To add the girl to the scene, enter the following code:
 Image("Girl").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
                .scaleEffect(0.25)
                .offset(x: -300, y: 0)
This is similar code to adding the leg: we used the Image initializer, passed
in the Girl image, made it resizable, and set its aspectRatio to fit. Then
we only needed two more modifiers to finish this image off: scaleEffect,
which will scale the image down to fit in the scene, and offset to place the
girl image in the correct position on the x-and y-axes (using values of -300
for x and 0 for y will place the girl in about the middle of the screen).
Adding the left leg
Finally, to complete the girl image, she needs a left leg:
///left leg
    Image("leg").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        .rotationEffect(.degrees(leftLeg ? -45 : 30),
          anchor: .topTrailing)
        .scaleEffect(0.12)
        .offset(x: -455, y: 90)
        .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration:
          0.4).delay(1).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),

--- Page 197 ---
          value: leftLeg)
        .onAppear() {
            leftLeg.toggle()
        }
The code for this left leg is pretty much the same as for the right leg, but we
used the leftLeg property and changed some values. For example, the
duration property for this leg is 0.4 and the delay property is 1 second. As
I mentioned earlier, by adding different durations and delays from the other
images, we can randomize the swinging effect a little bit so that the legs
don’t both go up and down together. This will give the animation a more
natural swinging motion.
Bringing the images together
With this code in place, we have finished piecing together the girl in the
swing scene, but if you look at the preview, it only shows the background
so far:

--- Page 199 ---
Figure 6.8: Our animation with just the background
Where are the two legs and the girl that we just coded? Well, it’s all there,
but it’s just not positioned over the background yet; it’s all off to the side of
the screen. This is because we positioned the legs in relation to the girl, but
we didn’t position the completed image in relation to the background scene.
To do that, let’s come out of the second ZStack brace and add the following
code:
        .offset(x: 25, y: 0)
        .rotationEffect(.degrees(girl ? -30 : -45), anchor:
          .top)
        .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration:
          1).delay(0.09).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),
          value: girl)
     .onAppear() {
            girl.toggle()
        }
This is what the code does:
And with that code completed, you can now see the girl and the legs.
However, there’s still a problem: the image of the girl and her legs looks too
small, and the legs are not connected to the girl:
The first line offsets the completed Girl image a small amount so it’s
centered.
The second line sets the rotation parameters for the completed image,
meaning how far we want the girl to swing back and forth. If the girl
property is true, the girl image will swing to the right (-30), and if it’s
false, the image will swing to the left (-45); this creates the swinging
animation. The anchor point is placed above the girl image; this is
where we want the image to pivot from.
And the third line adds the animation to the completed image, with a
duration value of 1 second and a slight delay of 0.09 seconds.

--- Page 201 ---
Figure 6.9: Our animation with the image parts disconnected
To fix this, we need to add one line of code just after the closing brace of
the very first ZStack:
    .frame(width: 950, height: 900)
This code sets the frame’s width and height of all the views inside the
ZStack so it’s in proportion to the background. Here is the result:

--- Page 203 ---
Figure 6.10: Our animation with the image parts (nearly) connected
Go ahead and run the application to see what it does. There are three
animations happening here; the girl is swinging back and forth, and each leg
is separately kicking up and down, as shown here:
Figure 6.11: The animation (with the parts nearly connected)
Everything is now animating... but look at the top of the swing in Figure
6.11. The rope ends in mid-air. Let’s use the rope and leaf images in the
Assets catalog to fix this.
Using the mask modifier
The rope is not attached to anything – how can we fix that? Well, it’s easy:
by adding two rope pieces and using a mask modifier to help them gradually
fade out at the top.
Directly after the closing brace of the onAppear modifier for the left leg,
add this code:

--- Page 204 ---
    //MARK: - ROPE
    ///right side rope masked
    Image("rope").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode:
      .fit)
        .mask(LinearGradient(gradient: fadeOutRope,
          startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom))
        .frame(width: 57, height: 80)
        .offset(x: -189, y: -100)
    ///left side rope masked
    Image("rope").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode:
      .fit)
        .mask(LinearGradient(gradient: fadeOutRope,
          startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom))
        .frame(width: 57, height: 80)
        .offset(x: -228, y: -108)
We need two pieces of rope because the swing has two pieces, a right piece
and a left piece. For this reason, I added two blocks of code, one for each
piece.
The code to add the rope is nothing new; we’re just using the Image
initializer to pass in our rope image and setting the aspect ratio to fit. But
what is new here is that we’re using the mask modifier. The mask modifier
applies a masking view to the view it’s called on. The masking view defines
the visible area of the view it is applied to, and any parts of the view that
fall outside of the masking view’s frame will not be visible.
The mask modifier takes a single parameter, which is the view that will be
used as the mask. If we pass in gradient as we’re doing here, we can
gradually fade out the rope as it extends upward. This is where the
LinearGradient function and our fadeOutRope property come into play;
the latter contains an array of gradient colors (two colors actually, clear and
black) that we pass into the LinearGradient function.
We also need to consider the startPoint (where you want to start blending
in the next color) and the endPoint (where you want to end one color and
start another color). In our code, the startPoint for the gradient is at the
top of the rope image, and endPoint is at the bottom of the rope image. The
reason why we want the start point at the top is so that it will have a clear
color so we can fade out the rope as it moves upward.

--- Page 205 ---
In the final two lines of code, we set the size of the left and right rope
images and offset them so they fit perfectly over the rope that’s attached to
the swing. This is the result of adding the two rope images with the mask
modifier:

--- Page 207 ---
Figure 6.12: Our animation after adding the mask modifier
If you run the app now, you’ll see that the rope extends up and fades away
at the top. This looks much better because now the rope appears to be
somewhere near the branch.
To improve this even further, we can partially cover up the end of the rope
by adding the leaves image to the scene. To do this, add this final bit of
code at the very end of the first ZStack:
Image("leaves").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        .frame(width: 460, height: 400)
        .rotationEffect(.degrees(-10), anchor: .trailing)
        .offset(x: -50, y: -180)
This is familiar code that we have used already, adding leaves to the scene,
setting an appropriate aspectRatio and frame size, rotating it to the correct
angle, which is perpendicular to the branch, and finally locating it on the x-
and y-axis with the offset modifier.
Now the rope at the top is partially hidden by the leaves, giving the effect
that it's tied off somewhere up in the branch:

--- Page 209 ---
Figure 6.13: Our completed animation
And with that, the project is complete. Run it and see what you think.
Summary
In this project, we learned how to take an image and cut out various parts at
the joints, use those new images in code, and animate them in different and
interesting ways. We also worked with modifiers that we have worked with
before, including rotation, scale, and offset, but also a new modifier,
mask.
There are ways to take this project further. If you’re feeling curious, see
whether you can cut the arms and head from the picture, and then give them
some animation as well. Play around with the parameters so you can make
each part move just enough to look natural. Maybe you can make the arms
pivot at the elbow just slightly as the swing moves forward and backward.
Add a button if you want so you can start and stop the animation that way.
Mainly, just experiment and have fun!
In the next project, we will look at the three different axes of rotation, x, y,
and z, and create an animation that will rotate a fan using gears and chains,
similar to a bicycle chain that turns its gears.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 210 ---
Building a Series of Belts and
Gears
In this project, we’re going to explore rotation, and more specifically, how
to use the rotation3DEffect modifier to rotate objects on the x-, y-, and z-
axis. We will be doing this by animating a series of gears and belts that will
eventually move a fan blade.
As we create this project, we will also explore how to use Groups and
Pragma Marks to make your code more organized, and the zIndex property,
which changes the depth of views.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and finished project from the Chapter 7
folder on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
Animating our first circular gear
Adding a worm gear using shadows
Using a marching ants effect to create a gear belt
Animating a gear shaft image
Animating a fan image
Bringing everything together in ContentView

--- Page 211 ---
Animating our first circular gear
To begin with, let’s create a new project, which I’m calling Gears and
Belts. Then, add the images for the project (which you can find in the
GitHub repository provided in the Technical requirements section) by
dragging and dropping the images into Swift’s asset catalog. The images we
are using are singleGear, doubleGear, wormGear, motor, shaft, fan, and
goldBackground.
In this section, we are going to start by animating a gear image around the
z-axis, so let’s make a SwiftUI file that will handle creating all the gears we
need (as we have done in previous projects, we are going to work on each
element for the project in separate files, and then piece them together in
ContentView to create the finished animations).
To do this, go to File | New | File, and then choose the SwiftUI View
template. Alternatively, you can use the Mac shortcut Command + N to get
to the same place more quickly. Whichever method you choose, name this
file GearView and press Create.
Now, we can fill this file by adding the variables needed to make and
animate gears images. Let’s start with a State variable that keeps track of
the animation state, the state being whether the animation is in motion or
not. Add this @State variable to the file:
@State private var rotateGear = false
This variable will help to keep track of whether the gear image is rotating or
not, so I have called it rotateGear. It is also set to false, which means the
animation will start inactive until this variable is changed to true.
The next variable will be of the String type, which we can use to set the
name of the gear image:
var gearImage: String = ""

--- Page 212 ---
If you look back into the asset catalog, you will see that you placed three
different types of gear in there: a single gear, a double gear, and a worm
gear. So, when it comes time to use all these files in ContentView, this
gearImage variable will help save time, as all we need to do is to type in the
name of the gear we want to use.
Next, we need to be able to set the size of the gear; here’s another variable
to handle that:
var gearWidth: CGFloat = 0.0
You might be wondering why we are setting the width of the gear but not
the height. Well, the gear images we are using are circles (except for the
worm gear); as you may know, circles only need one dimension, the width
or height, because circles have a diameter that is always the same,
regardless of which dimension is measured.
Continuing with the variables needed for this file, let’s add another variable
that indicates the number of degrees our gear will turn:
var gearDegrees: Double = 0.0
This variable is called gearDegrees. A value of 360 will turn the gear image
for one revolution, but right now, it is initialized as 0.0.
We will also place gears all around the screen, so we’ll need to set a couple
of variables to handle the location of these gears. We will use two of them
to set the X and Y location:
var offsetGearX: CGFloat = 0.0
var offsetGearY: CGFloat = 0.0
Next, we need to be able to rotate the gears, and later the belts, to different
orientations in relation to their surroundings, so let’s add a variable that will
be in charge of setting that value:
var rotateDegrees: Double = 0.0

--- Page 213 ---
Then, we will add a variable to set the duration of the spinning gear,
meaning how long it takes to finish one revolution:
var duration: Double = 0.0
The duration variable is set to 0, but when it gets set to a value such as 7,
for example, that means it will take 7 seconds for the gear to turn one full
revolution.
Finally, for this file, we need three more variables to set the x-, y-, and z-
axis position of the gear:
var xAxis: CGFloat = 0.0
var yAxis: CGFloat = 0.0
var zAxis: CGFloat = 0.0
Each of these variables will control the axis that the gear rotates around.
The axis is what allows us to rotate an object in three dimensions, which
will help create perspective and the effect of depth in the scene. These
variables are appropriately named xAxis, yAxis, and zAxis.
We have all the variables in place, so let’s now add the code into the body
of the struct and make our first gear. First, let’s add a ZStack to hold all of
the views we need:
 ZStack {
        }
Now, inside the ZStack, we can use the Image initializer, which will place a
gear image on the screen:
ZStack {
    Image(gearImage)
       }
Remember, we have initialized the preceding gearImage variable to an
empty string; this is what we want because it allows us to pass in different
string names that represent the gear images in the asset catalog.

--- Page 214 ---
Next, we need several modifiers to size and place the gear image, as well as
the animation modifiers to make the gear image turn. Add the following
code under Image(gearImage):
ZStack {
            Image(gearImage)
                .resizable()
                .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
                .frame(width: gearWidth)
                .rotationEffect(.degrees(rotateGear ? 
                  gearDegrees : 0))
                .animation(Animation.linear(duration: 
                  duration).repeatForever(autoreverses: 
false),                   value: rotateGear)
                .rotation3DEffect(
                    .degrees(rotateDegrees),axis: (x: xAxis, 
y:                       yAxis, z: zAxis))
                .offset(x: offsetGearX, y: offsetGearY)
        }
Let’s look at the modifiers we are using here:
The other option is fill; this means that the object will be scaled up or
down to fill the space it is being displayed in without distorting its shape.
Some parts of the object may be outside of the visible area, but the object
will maintain its aspect ratio. We haven’t used this here though.
Firstly, we know that we need to give the image the ability to resize,
which is what the resizable modifier is for.
Then, we want to constrain the gear image dimensions with the fit
aspect ratio option; as we have seen before, this mode preserves the
content’s aspect ratio and indicates that the object should be scaled to fit
within the available space while maintaining its aspect ratio. This means
that the object will be scaled down if necessary so that it fits within the
space it’s being displayed in, without distorting its shape.
Next, the frame of the image is set with the gearWidth modifer, which
has been initialized to 0. By doing this, we can pass in whatever value
we need to create any size gear.

--- Page 215 ---
The next line calls the rotationEffect modifier, which will rotate
gearImage by a value we pass in. This modifier will only rotate the gear
image when the rotateGear variable becomes true; otherwise, a value
of 0 gets used, meaning no rotation.
After that, we add the animation modifier, which gets a linear
animation. The duration of the animation will depend on the value that’s
held in the duration variable – here, we have set the duration to
repeatForever and autoreverses to false. Then, we have the value
parameter, which accepts into its parameter the variable we want to
animate and then applies the animation to the view.
The next modifier is an interesting one, it’s called rotation3DEffect.
This rotates a view in three dimensions around the given axis; the
amount of rotation will be determined by the degrees modifier that is
being used within it. To understand how the view will be rotated, it’s
important to know where the x-, y-, and z-axes exist on an iPhone
screen. Look at the following illustration:

--- Page 216 ---
Figure 7.1: The three axes
The x-axis runs from left to right on the iPhone screen, the y-axis runs from
top to bottom, and the z-axis runs from back to front. These axes are three
different planes of dimensional space that hold views or objects, and when
an object rotates, it does so on one, or all, of these axes. Looking at the
rotation3DEffect modifier, if we pass a value in one of the axis
parameters, the view will then rotate on that axis by the specified number of
degrees.
With the modifiers all in place, we only need to start the animation, so let’s
add the following code at the end of ZStack’s closing brace:
.onAppear() {
            rotateGear.toggle()
        }.shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 0, y: 0)
The onAppear modifier, as we have seen before, will run the code in its
body when the scene first appears. In the code, we want to toggle the
rotateGear variable to true to start the animation. I’m also adding a little
bit of black shadow to the gear image, which gives it a nicer look around its
border.
Now, with everything we coded so far though, we still don’t see any images
in the previews! Let’s fix that and add some values into the Previews struct
in order to create a gear. In this example, we’ll use the double gear image,
and give it a size. Place the following code in GearView_Previews so we
can see the animation work:
 GearView(gearImage: "doubleGear", gearWidth: 100, 
gearDegrees:    360, offsetGearX: 0, offsetGearY: 0, 
Back to the code, lastly, the gear image will need to be placed
somewhere on the screen; for that placement, we can use the help of the
offset modifier. This modifier has two parameters, x and y, and the
values will be determined by the offsetGearX and offsetGearY
variables.

--- Page 217 ---
duration: 5)
            .previewLayout(.fixed(width: 200, height: 200))
This code fills out the GearView struct with some values. The first
parameter uses the doubleGear image from the asset catalog as the gear to
display. Next, the gearWidth and gearDegrees parameters receive values to
set the width and turning degree. Then, for the offset parameters, by
setting them to zero, the gear will just stay in the middle of the screen.
Finally, adding a duration of 5 seconds means it’ll take 5 seconds for the
gear to turn for one complete revolution.
With all that in place, now, we can run the previews and check what we
have done so far:

--- Page 219 ---
Figure 7.2: Adding our first gear
The gear now turns, again, at a rate of one revolution in 5 seconds.
Also, notice that I’m setting a fixed width and height for the preview
window, as we don’t need a full-size screen to display a small gear; 200 x
200 is more than enough room.
Now, with our gear in place and this file complete, anytime we need to
make a gear anywhere in the project, all we have to do is call the gearView
struct and pass in some values to create a gear of any size, wherever needed
on the screen.
However, despite all that work, there is one gear that we won’t be able to
turn in any meaningful way because it’s not a circular shape, and that’s the
worm gear image in the asset catalog. In the next section, I’ll explain what a
worm gear is, and how to make it turn, or at least make it look like it’s
turning.
Animating a worm gear using
shadows
Worm gears look like big screws with spiral threads, but without a screw
head on the top. They’re used in equipment and machines where strength is
an important factor because they are very durable and can handle a lot of
torque. Here is a typical worm gear:

--- Page 220 ---
Figure 7.3: A worm gear
If we add a worm gear image to the project and animate it as we did with
the round gear, it wouldn’t work very well, simply because the worm gear
image is not a round shape. So, how can we make an irregularly shaped
image appear like it’s turning as it would in the real world?
What we can do is place small, shaded rectangles over the shiny parts of the
worm gear image and animate those rectangles instead, which will create
the illusion that the image is turning or spinning. Clever, right?
First, create a new file, choose the SwiftUI View template, and name it
WormGearView. Inside this file, within the WormGear struct, we will start off
by adding four State properties, one for each rectangle we need:
    @State private var rect1 = false
    @State private var rect2 = false
    @State private var rect3 = false
    @State private var rect4 = false
Now in our main ZStack, let’s add another ZStack within to display the
worm gear image:
 ZStack {
    ZStack {
                Image("wormGear").resizable().frame(width: 
100,                   height: 75)

--- Page 221 ---
           }
        }
The Image initializer declares the image and resizes it to a width and height
that we can use.
Next, we will create the first rectangle that we need to place over the shiny
part of the worm gear. To do so, add the following code:
HStack {
                    Rectangle()
                        .frame(width: 4, height: 40)
                        .foregroundColor(.black)
                        .cornerRadius(5)
                        .opacity(rect1 ? 0 : 0.3)
                        .offset(x: 2, y: rect1 ? 14 : -8)
                        .animation(Animation.easeInOut 
                          (duration: 0.5).repeatForever 
                          (autoreverses: true), value: rect1)
                        .rotationEffect(.degrees(-4), 
anchor:                           .top)
                        .onAppear(){
                            rect1.toggle()
                        }
        }
The rectangles will be placed in an HStack because we want to put them
side by side, going from left to right across the gear. We’re also using
familiar modifiers that we’ve used before. We’ve made the rectangles black
and given them a slight corner radius. The opacity of the rectangle will
depend on whether the animating variable called rect1 is true or not: if the
rect1 property becomes true, then we will give the rectangle a bit of
visibility using an opacity of 0.3; when the rect1 property is false, we’ll
remove all opacity and hide it.
The next line of code uses the offset modifier to place this rectangle
directly over the first shiny part of this worm gear on the left side. This
offset modifier is also responsible for moving the small rectangle up and
down on the y-axis, either up 14 points when rect1 is true, or it will move
the rectangle down to -8 points when it becomes false. The effect we’re
going for here is to animate these tiny rectangles up and down and at the

--- Page 222 ---
same time, fade them in and out over the shiny part of the worm gear
image, creating the illusion that the part is turning.
Now for the animation modifier: this uses an easeInOut timing curve, has
a duration of half a second, and is set to repeatForever, with
autoreverses set to true.
After that, the rotationEffect modifier is used to rotate this small
rectangle exactly where we want it on the worm gear. The rectangle will
rotate around the anchor point, which we have set to the top part of the
rectangle.
And finally, in the onAppear modifier, we toggled rect1 so the animation
starts when the view appears.
Now, go ahead and run the project; you can see the results in the preview:

--- Page 223 ---
Figure 7.4: A worm gear in our animation

--- Page 224 ---
Looking at the figure, it’s a bit hard to see the rectangle, but it’s definitely
there, a faint thin rectangle just after the third tooth. If you want to see the
rectangle better, remove the worm gear by misspelling wormGear in the
Image initializer, which will remove the worm gear from the previews (they
hate when we misspell something!). When you run the project again, this is
what you’ll see:
Figure 7.5: The rectangle that overlays the worm gear
You should see the rectangle moving up and down, as well as fading in and
out.
For the placement of this rectangle, ideally, we want it to be on the left,
over the first tooth; however, that will happen when we add the other
rectangles into this HStack. Remember, an HStack lines everything up from
left to right, but since we only have one rectangle in the HStack, the HStack
places it in the middle for now.
So, let’s now add a second rectangle into the HStack, just under the first
one:
                    Rectangle()
                        .frame(width: 4, height: 40)
                        .foregroundColor(.black)
                        .cornerRadius(5)
                        .opacity(rect2 ? 0 : 0.3)
                        .offset(x: 7, y: rect2 ? -15 : -8)
                        .animation(Animation.easeInOut 
                          (duration: 0.5).repeatForever 
                          (autoreverses: true), value: rect2)

--- Page 225 ---
                        .rotationEffect(.degrees(-8))
                        .onAppear(){
                            rect2.toggle()
                        }
This code is almost identical to what we’ve just added for the first
rectangle. The difference here is we are offsetting the rectangle to a
different location over the gear image, and the rotation is slightly different
so it can be lined up over the next shiny part of the gear.
Run the code and you’ll see two animating rectangles. They’re not quite
centered over the first and second shiny teeth of the gears yet, because we
have two more rectangles to add, and then the HStack will center each
animating rectangle perfectly for us.
Before we continue and add the third and fourth rectangles though, take a
look at the first three modifiers of these two rectangles that we just added.
They both have identical values in them, so we are repeating the code here,
which is what we try to avoid when programming. Since the values don’t
change in these modifiers and we will use them in all four rectangles,
instead, we can make a custom modifier into which we can put these three
modifiers and shorten our code a little bit.
To create a custom modifier, we need to create a struct that conforms to the
ViewModifier protocol. This protocol has one requirement, which is to
implement a method called body content that will accept our content and
then must return a view.
We can create a custom modifier at the bottom of the WormGear file. Moving
outside of the WormGear struct completely and coming to the bottom of this
file, add the following struct:
struct RectModifiers: ViewModifier {
    func body(content: Content) -> some View {
        content
            .frame(width: 4, height: 40)
            .foregroundColor(.black)
            .cornerRadius(5)

--- Page 226 ---
    }
}
This is a custom modifier struct, which I called RectModifiers; as you can
see, we are implementing the body content method inside it, which is the
requirement needed to satisfy the ViewModifier protocol. Then, I added the
three modifiers that we were repeating in our code (i.e., the ones that
weren’t changing in value: frame, foregroundColor, and cornerRadius).
Now, all we have to do is go back to the first rectangle that we created, just
after the worm gear creation, remove those three modifiers, and instead, call
our custom modifier:
.modifier(RectModifiers())
To use it, we pass into it the name of the custom struct we just made,
RectModifiers. This new modifier struct can hold as many modifiers as we
want to put in there, so modifiers that don’t change in value are probably a
good idea to use here; this reduces the amount of code we need to write,
especially if we have many views (for example, if we were to add 30 or 40
rectangles in this file).
Now, we can proceed to add the final two rectangles to help with the
illusion that this gear is turning. Here’s what the code looks like:
                  Rectangle().modifier(RectModifiers())
                        .opacity(rect3 ? 0 : 0.3)
                        .offset(x: 5, y: rect3 ? -5 : -10)
                        .animation(Animation.easeInOut 
                          (duration: 0.5).repeatForever 
                          (autoreverses: true), value: rect3)
                        .rotationEffect(.degrees(-8), 
anchor:                           .top)
                        .onAppear(){
                            rect3.toggle()
                        }
                    Rectangle().modifier(RectModifiers())
                        .opacity(rect4 ? 0 : 0.3)
                        .offset(x: 4, y: rect4 ? -10 : -10)
                        .animation(Animation.easeInOut 
                          (duration: 0.5).repeatForever 

--- Page 227 ---
                          (autoreverses: true), value: rect4)
                        .rotationEffect(.degrees(-7), 
anchor:                           .top)
                        .onAppear(){
                            rect4.toggle()
Before we try it out, let’s add some shadow to these moving rectangles to
help make them a little more pronounced. Add this code at the end of the
closing brace of the first ZStack:
 .shadow(color: .black, radius: 0.4, x: 0.0, y: 1)
By using the shadow modifier, and passing in a black shadow to go over
each rectangle, I have given this shadow 4 points of radius, and the shadow
will be shown on the y-axis with a value of 1. Using a positive number
value will move the shadow along the y-axis, while using a negative
number will move the shadow along the y-axis in the opposite direction.
Play around with these numbers so you can see how they affect the
shadow’s prominence and location.
And with that code, this file is now complete. Run the project and see what
you think:

--- Page 228 ---
Figure 7.6: The finished worm gear
We have a worm gear that actually looks like it’s turning. Notice that each
rectangle has lined up completely over the teeth of the worm gear, starting
from the left and moving to the right. The shiny parts are being covered up
and exposed over and over again, at a nice even pace, which is actually
about how fast many worm gears work.

--- Page 229 ---
Now we have finished animating the worm gears, we’re going to create a
marching ants effect that we can use to simulate a moving gear chain. We
can accomplish that using the dashPhase initializer.
Using a marching ants effect to
create a gear belt
Now that we have animated our circular and worm gears, next, we need to
make some belts that can be used to wrap around those gears and connect
them.
What we are actually doing is creating a marching ants effect. You probably
have used this effect before, but without knowing what it was called –
anytime you used your mouse or trackpad and outlined a view or created a
bounding box around objects to select them, you were using the marching
ants effect. You may remember that in Chapter 6 when we used the Lasso
Selection tool in Mac’s Previews app, the little dashes that outlined the
portion of the image selected were an example of this effect.
So, to create our gear belt, let’s start this section by adding another new file,
which we’ll call BeltView. Then, as we usually do, we’ll add the variables
that make everything work first, inside the BeltView struct:
@State var animateBelt: Bool = false
    var beltWidth: CGFloat = 0.0
    var beltHeight: CGFloat = 0.0
    var offsetBeltX: CGFloat = 0.0
    var offsetBeltY: CGFloat = 0.0
    var dashPhaseValue: CGFloat = 45
    var rotateDegrees: Double = 0.0
    var xAxis: CGFloat = 0.0
    var yAxis: CGFloat = 0.0
    var zAxis: CGFloat = 0.0
Each one of these variables is in charge of a specific task:
animateBelt keeps track of the animation for the belt.

--- Page 230 ---
With the variables in place, we can move into the body of the struct and
start adding the code to create the belt. There’s not a lot of code to make a
belt. First, start by adding a ZStack to hold our views:
 ZStack {
        }
Next, we want to create the shape of the belt. If you look at most belts or
chains that are gear-driven, they have a shape similar to a capsule, and
luckily, SwiftUI gives us a capsule shape that we can use. Add the
following code, including its modifiers, inside of the ZStack:
            Capsule()
                .stroke(Color.black, style: StrokeStyle 
                  (lineWidth: 7, lineJoin: .round, dash: 
                  [5, 1.4], dashPhase: animateBelt ? 
                  dashPhaseValue : 0))
                .frame(width: beltWidth, height: beltHeight)
                .animation(Animation.linear(duration: 
                  3).repeatForever(autoreverses: 
false).                  speed(3), value: animateBelt)
This is only about five lines of code, but it does a lot of work here. First, we
declare the capsule shape that we need and then use the stroke modifier on
it. The stroke modifier does quite a bit and is also responsible for
beltWidth and beltHeight set the width and height of the belt.
offsetBeltX and offsetBeltY locate the belt in specific areas on the
screen.
dashPhaseValue is in charge of designing the belt – for example, how
far we want to space the belt segments apart from each other, how thick
they should be, and so on.
rotateDegrees is used after we position the belt to rotate it either
horizontally or vertically by passing in a degree number.
xAxis, yAxis, and zAxis orient the belt on the x-, y-, and z-axes,
respectively. You will see these three variables come into play when we
start piecing together all these separate files into ContentView.

--- Page 231 ---
designing the belt: its first parameter will give the belt a color (we have
chosen black), and the second parameter is the strokeStyle parameter,
where we pass in a StrokeStyle struct.
This StrokeStyle struct has some parameters of its own that help style the
belt:
After the strokeStyle struct, the next modifier is the frame, which sets the
width and height of the whole belt. Then we added an animation modifier,
with a linear animation and a duration of three seconds to complete one
revolution, and autoreverses set to false (as we just want the belt to turn
in one direction only).
Now we need to add the onAppear modifier so we can start the animation
when the app loads up. To do that, add the following code right under the
existing code:
The first one is the lineWidth parameter. This one is fairly self-
explanatory; it just means how wide we want to make the belt, which
we have set to 7 points.
There’s also a lineJoin parameter. This is a value that determines how
the segments of the belt will join together. There are three options we
could use, round, bevel, and miter; I thought the line segments would
look best using the round option, however feel free to experiment with
all these values and numbers to get the best look for you.
The next parameter is called dash, which is responsible for the length
of the segments that’s used to create the belt, and the gap between those
segments. The first value of this parameter will determine the length of
the segment (a larger number makes the segments bigger, while a
smaller number makes the segments smaller); I’m using 5 points for this
value. The second value determines the gap size between the segments
(a larger number creates a larger gap, while a smaller number creates a
smaller gap); for this value, a 1.4 point value creates gap that looks
really good.

--- Page 232 ---
      .onAppear {
                    animateBelt.toggle()
                }
This code toggles the animateBelt property to true, kicking off the belt
animation.
There’s only one last bit of code we need to add to finish off the styling of
the belt, and that is to rotate the belt to the proper angle for the gears.
Coming out of ZStack, just after its closing brace, add the following code:
        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 10, x: 1, y: 0)
        .rotationEffect(.degrees(rotateDegrees), anchor: 
          .center)
        .offset(x: offsetBeltX, y: offsetBeltY)
This code will act on everything that is in the ZStack because it’s been put
after its closing brace. Here, I added a shadow modifier, setting the color to
black and a radius of 10 to make the belt more pronounced, and placed the
shadow on the x-axis. You can play around with the colors and these
numbers for the shadow: by increasing the radius, you will make the
shadow bigger, and by increasing the numbers for the x and y parameters,
you can move the shadow up, down, left, and right. Remember, you can use
negative numbers to move the shadow in the opposite direction.
The next modifier we are placing on the entire ZStack is rotationEffect.
This will rotate the completed belt to the angle we specify; when we call
these various methods later in ContentView, we’ll pass in different values
that’ll orient the belt and size it just the way we want.
Finally, we added the offset modifier, which allows us to place the belt
anywhere on the screen using the x- and y-coordinates.
If you try to test out what we’ve done, you won’t see anything in the
previews yet because we’ve just added a bunch of different variables into
the BeltView struct. However, we’re not using those variables in the
Previews struct. To fix this, let’s update the Previews struct to the
following:

--- Page 233 ---
struct BeltView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        BeltView(animateBelt: true, beltWidth: 380, 
beltHeight:           48, offsetBeltX: 0, offsetBeltY: 0, 
rotateDegrees:           90)
            .previewLayout(.fixed(width: 100, height: 400))
    }
}
When you run Previews now, you’ll see the belt in action:

--- Page 235 ---
Figure 7.7: The finished belt with the marching ants effect
It’s turning clockwise, has a nice style and spacing to fit our gears later, and
the shadow makes it really come off the screen a bit.
Note
If you notice that the belt is not animating smoothly, meaning it’s rotating
but pauses slightly every few seconds or so, what you can do is play around
with the dashPhase value, which is used to specify the starting point of the
dashes in a dashed or dotted line. I set it to an initial value of 45 and that
removed the pause for me, but if it does not remove it for your project,
simply increase or decrease that value by 1, check the animation, and then
tweak the value again by 1 until you find the sweet spot.
And that’s another file under our belt (sorry, couldn’t help myself!). Let’s
continue on to the next section, where we’ll add a gear shaft to the mix.
This object will turn a belt, which, in turn, will spin a fan.
Animating a gear shaft image
Continuing on to the next component, we need a gear shaft. A gear shaft is a
cylindrical rod that has round gears at each end and is used to attach other
gears or belts together, ultimately producing some form of output or work.
For example, within the motor in your car, there is a gear shaft that turns
due to the gasoline combusting. The output or work produced by that
process moves the car forward. Our gear shaft won’t move a car, but
instead, will turn a fan. After creating this, as with the worm gear, we will
animate the gear shaft by using animating rectangles. Again, this is because
the image we are using is not round, so we cannot rotate it on the z-axis like
the other gear images.
Let’s start off by creating a new SwiftUI View file, which we’ll call
GearShaftView. Next, let’s add the variables we need for this file; we only
need one variable, and that’s to track the animation:
 @State var animateRect: Bool = false

--- Page 236 ---
After the variable, we just need to add the code for the gear shaft image and
animate it. Add the following code inside the body property:
var body: some View 
        ZStack {
            ZStack {
                Image("shaft").resizable().frame(width: 160, 
                  height: 40)
                Rectangle().frame(width: 140, height: 8)
                    .foregroundColor(.black)
                    .cornerRadius(5)
                    .opacity(animateRect ? 0 : 0.5)
                    .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                      0.5).repeatForever(autoreverses: 
true),                       value: animateRect)
                    .onAppear() {
                        animateRect.toggle()
                    }.offset(x: 0, y: -7)
            }
        }
    }
We start by bringing the gear shaft image into the scene and setting the
width and height dimensions for it. After that, we add a rectangle, which
will be the animating shadow moving up and down over the shaft. The color
of the shadow is black, with a little bit of a corner radius added on. The
opacity will animate from 0, which is invisible, to 0.5, which is 50%
visible. This will produce a nice shadowy rectangle that appears and
disappears at the same cadence that the gears and shafts are turning.
In the next line of code, the animation is added, with a duration of one-half
a second to complete one revolution. It has autoreverses set to true
because if we set autoreverses to false, then the animation would look
too abrupt (it needs autoreverses in order to slide the rectangle back
down).
Then, we start the animation in the onAppear method and offset the
rectangle so it’s neatly placed exactly where we want it, over the shaft
image, using the offset modifier set to 0 for x and –7 for y.

--- Page 237 ---
We are getting close to putting all these files together, but next up, we’re
going to animate the fan image.
Animating a fan image
There are actually two components left to create, the fan and the motor.
However, we will add the motor when we start piecing all of the files
together inside ContentView. For that reason, let’s focus on creating the fan
now.
Like always, create a new file, select the SwiftUI View template, and call it
FanView. In this file, we only need two variables – one for the state of the
animation and one to hold the degrees of rotation for the fan; here they are:
       @State private var rotateFan = false
    var degrees: Double = 360 * 4
This file is quite short, so just add the following code to complete it:
var body: some View {
        ZStack {
        Image("fan").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: 
          .fit).frame(width: 200)
            .rotationEffect(.degrees(rotateFan ? degrees : 
0),               anchor: .center)
            .animation(Animation.linear(duration: 
4)              .repeatForever(autoreverses: false), 
              value: rotateFan)
        }.onAppear() {
            rotateFan.toggle()
        }.shadow(color: .black, radius: 15)
    }
Let’s review this code. Inside the ZStack, we added the image of the fan
and resized it. Then we used the rotationEffect modifier on it to make it
turn. We want the fan to spin around its center, so we set the anchor to
center, and then add the animation with a duration of 4, which means it
will spin 4 revolutions in 4 seconds. After that, set the animation to

--- Page 238 ---
repeatForever and set autoreverses to false (reverse because we want
the fan to spin only in one direction).
Then, let’s start the animation using the onAppear modifier and add a nice
heavy shadow around the fan with a 15-point radius.
And that completes the fan. Now, let’s now head over to ContentView to
create the final component – the motor – and start bringing all the files
together in one view.
Bringing everything together in
ContentView
Okay – we have accomplished a lot, including creating files for single and
double gears, a worm gear, a gearshift, and a fan. Now, let’s create the final
file for the motor and organize all these files together in ContentView.
We’re going to use a Swift feature called Pragma Marks; this is a special
syntax that labels and delineates blocks of code with a very thin line
between them and makes those labels appear in one drop-down menu for
easy searching and navigation. That’s very helpful when you have very
large files with hundreds or thousands of lines of code.
We will also use a SwiftUI feature called Groups; this can help us further
organize all the code in the ContentView file by grouping multiple objects
together, such as views, scenes, or even commands, into a single unit. We
will organize much of the code into groups based on whether it is animated
on the x-, y-, or z-axis.
And then we will use the ZIndex modifier. This modifier works with views
that are overlapping each other, so it can be used to force a view either to
the front or the back of other views. This is important because sometimes
we need a view to be more prominent in the scene and another view to be
hidden behind the scene, with only parts of it visible. You’ll see how this
works soon.

--- Page 239 ---
To help you complete this project, I have also labeled all the views to help
you identify their location on the screen, and how they are oriented:
Figure 7.8: Our project with the views labeled
G annotations refer to the gears and B annotations refer to the belts. I
numbered each gear and belt according to how it will appear in the code.
We will be writing this code sequentially by the numbers – so, G1, then G2,
then G3, and so on. The diagram shows the placement of all the parts.
As always, we have the ContentView file already created for us when we
started the project, so we don’t need to create any more new files. The first
thing we are going to do here in ContentView is to add the motor.

--- Page 240 ---
Adding the motor
To add the motor, move into the body property of ContentView and then
add a main ZStack to hold everything. Then, inside that, place another
ZStack:
ZStack {
     ZStack {
            }
       }
Inside the second ZStack, let’s add our first organizational structure, the
Pragma Mark. To make a Pragma Mark, the syntax requires two forward
slashes and MARK written in capital letters, followed by a colon. That will
create a thin line moving across the file. You can write whatever you want
after that for the title.
So, to create a Pragma Mark for the motor, enter the following code:
 //MARK: - MOTOR
Now, notice the very thin line that the Pragma Mark creates from one end of
the code file to the other within the editor:
Figure 7.9: Our first Pragma Mark
The Pragma Mark also does something very useful behind the scenes too. If
you look at the top left of your Xcode menu bar, where all the tabs appear,
you’ll see a MOTOR tab:

--- Page 241 ---
Figure 7.10: The Pragma Mark tab
If you click on the tab, a drop-down menu will open up, containing all the
Pragma Marks that you created; clicking on any one of them will take you
immediately to the code in that part of the file. You’ll see the usefulness of
this when you have dozens or even hundreds of different blocks of code in
one file, eliminating the need to scroll through a lengthy file.
Now, let’s add the code that creates the motor in the scene:
Group {
       Image("motor").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: 
         .fit).frame(width: 140, height: 120)
           .offset(x: -120, y: 90)
                }
This is our first time using the Group syntax. Looking at the code inside the
group, it contains everything that we’ve been doing all along: creating the
motor using the image that’s in the Assets catalog, resizing it, setting the
aspect ratio so the motor fits on the screen as we want, giving it a frame
size, and offsetting on the x- and y-axis.
If we run the code, this is what we should have in the previews so far:

--- Page 243 ---
Figure 7.11: The motor
There’s only one object in that group, the motor, but that’s perfectly fine –
we’ll be adding more objects into further groups as we make them. For
now, let’s now add some gears to the scene.
Adding the gears along the x-, y-, and
z-axes
In this section, we will use the GearView struct to add the gears. Remember,
we already designed and animated the gears in the GearView file, so all we
need to do is call the GearView struct here in ContentView and pass in some
values.
This is where we will also be rotating the gears and belts on the x-, y-, and
z-axes, so to recap how each axis operates on the screen (shown back in
Figure 7.1):
With that understanding, let’s start adding components. Put the following
code in right after the closing brace of the motor group:
      //MARK: - GEARS ANIMATING ON THE Z AXIS
                Group {
                    ///Gear 1
                    GearView(gearImage: "doubleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 40, gearDegrees: 360, 
                      offsetGearX: -124, offsetGearY: 102, 
                      duration: 5)
                    ///Gear 2
                    GearView(gearImage: "doubleGear", 
The y-axis runs from top to bottom and bottom to top.
The x-axis runs from left to right and right to left.
The z-axis moves from back to front or front to back. Holding an
object in your hand and moving closer to your eyes is an example of
moving that object along the z-axis.

--- Page 244 ---
                      gearWidth: 100, gearDegrees: 360, 
                      offsetGearX: -124, offsetGearY: -280, 
                      duration: 7)
                    ///Gear 3
                    GearView(gearImage: "doubleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 100, gearDegrees: 360, 
                      offsetGearX: 124, offsetGearY: -280, 
                      duration: 7)
                    ///Gear 4
                    GearView(gearImage: "doubleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 100, gearDegrees: 360, 
                      offsetGearX: 124, offsetGearY: -70, 
                      duration: 7)
                    ///Gear 5
                    GearView(gearImage: "doubleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 80, gearDegrees: -360, 
                      offsetGearX: 49, offsetGearY: -113, 
                      duration: 5)
                    ///Gear 6
                    GearView(gearImage: "doubleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 100, gearDegrees: 360, 
                      offsetGearX: -6, offsetGearY: -80, 
                      duration: 7)
                }
I titled this group GEARS ANIMATING ON THE Z AXIS. Here, I’m calling the
GearView struct six times, which creates six gears that are turning on the z-
axis. Let’s just look at Gear 1, as they are pretty similar, just with different
values.
So, in Gear 1, I set the gear’s width to 40 points, which makes a small gear,
and positioned it directly over the front of the motor using the offsetGearX
and offsetGearY parameters. The amount of degrees passed into the
gearDegrees parameter is 360; that’s one revolution of a circle, as we want
these gears to turn for a full revolution.
Since these are 2D images and not 3D images of gears, the depth is not
really perceivable, and the gears will lie flat and be animated clockwise.
The duration parameter controls the amount of time it takes the gear to
turn one full revolution; I’m using a value of 7 for the larger gears, and a
value of 5 for the smaller ones. The small and larger gears are made using
the gearWidth parameter.

--- Page 245 ---
Looking at the gearDegrees parameter, the values I’m using are all set to
360 (a positive number) to move them clockwise. Well, that is except for
Gear 5, which is set to -360 (a negative), as that gear will move
counterclockwise.
This is what the previous code we just wrote should look like:

--- Page 247 ---
Figure 7.12: The gears rotating on the z-axis
If you run this in the simulator, all of those gears will now be turning
because we set the animation up already in the GearView file.
Let’s continue and add another group of gears that animate on the y-axis
this time. Add the following code right under the closing brace of the
previous group:
                //MARK: - GEARS ANIMATING ON THE Y AXIS
                Group {
                    ///Gear 7
                    GearView(gearImage: "singleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 100, gearDegrees: -360, 
                      offsetGearX: -62, offsetGearY: -85, 
                      rotateDegrees: 76, duration: 7, xAxis: 
0,                       yAxis: 1, zAxis: 0)
                    ///Gear 8
                    GearView(gearImage: "singleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 25, gearDegrees: -360, 
                      offsetGearX: -59, offsetGearY: 19, 
                      rotateDegrees: 76, duration: 7, xAxis: 
0,                       yAxis: 1, zAxis: 0)
                    ///Gear 10
                    GearView(gearImage: "singleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 100, gearDegrees: -360, 
                      offsetGearX: 160, offsetGearY: 94, 
                      rotateDegrees: 76, duration: 7, xAxis: 
0,                       yAxis: 1, zAxis: 0)
                    ///Gear 11
                    GearView(gearImage: "singleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 25, gearDegrees: -360, 
                      offsetGearX: 163, offsetGearY: 252, 
                      rotateDegrees: 76, duration: 7, xAxis: 
0,                       yAxis: 1, zAxis: 0)
                }
Again, we start off this group of code by adding our organizational Pragma
Mark called GEARS ANIMATING ON THE Y AXIS. Here, we call the GearView
struct four times, creating four gears that will rotate on the y-axis.
Looking at Gear 7 as an example, this has a width of 100 points, and
gearDegrees is set to -360 (which means the gear rotates

--- Page 248 ---
counterclockwise). Next, the code repositions the gears using the
offsetGearX and offsetGearY parameters. And by using the
rotateDegrees parameter, and passing in a value of 76, we can rotate this
gear on the y-axis.
The other three gears are almost exactly the same, except their size and
offset locations vary, but they will all turn on the y-axis.
After adding this group of code, this is what your previews should look
like:

--- Page 250 ---
Figure 7.13: The gears rotating on the y-axis
Now, when you run the simulator, all these gears will be turning on their set
axis.
Let’s continue and add another group that will make a gear animate on the
x-axis. Add the following code right after the closing brace of the previous
group:
  //MARK: - GEAR ANIMATING ON THE X AXIS
   Group {
                    ///Gear 9
                    GearView(gearImage: "singleGear", 
                      gearWidth: 175, gearDegrees: 360, 
                      offsetGearX: 60, offsetGearY: 39, 
                      rotateDegrees: 84, duration: 
7,  xAxis:                       1, yAxis: 0, zAxis: 0)
                }
The GEAR ANIMATING ON THE X AXIS group just has one gear here and it’s
the biggest gear so far, with a width of 175 points. This gear will mesh up
with two other gears – the gear to its right in the scene and the worm gear.
This is similar to the code we’ve already placed for the other gears in that
we use the GearView initializer to create it and use the same parameters to
size and locate it in the scene, but the difference here is that we’re using the
xAxis parameter, and passing in a value of 1. The xAxis parameter will
rotate this gear on the x-axis, a completely different angle than for the y-axis
or z-axis. The amount of rotation is 84 degrees.
Before we run this and check things out, let’s add the worm gear to see how
everything fits together.
Adding the worm gear
To add the worm gear to our ContentView, add the following code:
 //MARK: - WORM GEAR
                Group {

--- Page 251 ---
                    WormGearView().offset(x: 60, y: 
30).                      zIndex(-1)
                }
This grouping is labeled WORM GEAR and is placed using the offset
modifier. Something new here though is the zIndex modifier. The zIndex
modifier places a view in front of or behind other views, which allows us to
position our views from front to back or vice versa.
I’ve talked about the z-axis already, which relates to depth and objects
moving closer to and farther away from us. Why would we want to move a
view closer or further away from our perspective? Well, let’s look at an
example of what happens if we don’t use the zIndex modifier in our code:

--- Page 253 ---
Figure 7.14: Adding the worm gear without zIndex
From the illustration, you can see that the worm gear has now moved to the
front, which is not the placement that I want. I want the worm gear to mesh
up from behind Gear 9.
Let’s now add the zIndex modifier back into our code and look at the
results:

--- Page 255 ---
Figure 7.15: Adding the worm gear with zIndex
All views in SwiftUI have a default zIndex of 0, so when I passed in a
negative number, the worm gear was placed behind Gear 9. As you can see,
this can be an important modifier when trying to organize your views
regarding how close or far away you want them to be.
And with that, we have finished all the gears, so now we can move on to
adding the belts into the scene.
Adding the belts
Continuing with the building out of our scene, let’s add the belts. Add the
following grouping, which contains three belts that move on the z-axis:
//MARK: - BELTS ON THE Z AXIS
                Group {
                    ///Belt 1
                    BeltView(animateBelt: true, beltWidth: 
                      425, beltHeight: 48, offsetBeltX: 
-124,                       offsetBeltY: -90, rotateDegrees: 
90)
                    ///Belt 2
                    BeltView(animateBelt: true, beltWidth: 
                      352, beltHeight: 100, offsetBeltX: 0, 
                      offsetBeltY: -280, rotateDegrees: 0)
                    ///Belt 3
                    BeltView(animateBelt: true, beltWidth: 
                      258, beltHeight: 48, offsetBeltX: 124, 
                      offsetBeltY: -175, rotateDegrees: 90)
                }
Here, we called the BeltView struct, set the animateBelt properties to
true, and then gave each belt an appropriate width and height so it could
connect to its corresponding gears using the beltWidth and beltHeight
parameters. After that, we place the belts where they need to be using the
offsetBelt parameters. Finally, we rotated the belts either by 90 degrees,
which places the belt vertically, or by 0 degrees, which places the other belt
horizontally. Here’s what they look like in relation to the gears they mesh
with:

--- Page 257 ---
Figure 7.16: The belts on the z-axis
Now, let’s take a look at rotating belts on the y-axis. As before, add the
following code after the closing brace of the previous group:
  //MARK: - BELTS ON THE Y AXIS
                Group {
                    ///Belt 4
                    BeltView( beltWidth: 32, beltHeight: 125)
                        .rotation3DEffect(.degrees(75), 
axis:                           (x: 0, y: 1, z: 0))
                        .offset(x: -60, y: -33)
                    ///Belt 5
                    BeltView(beltWidth: 28, beltHeight: 180, 
                      offsetBeltY: -10)
                        .rotation3DEffect(.degrees(75), 
axis:                           (x: 0, y: 1, z: 0))
                        .offset(x: 162, y: 185)
                }
Calling the BeltView struct again, we have set these two belts to a width
and height appropriate for the gear they will be meshed with. Then, we used
the rotation3DEffect modifier and rotated these belts on the y-axis. The
rotation happens when we pass a value of 1 into the y parameter, and they
will rotate by 75 degrees. As with the other belts, we offset them so that
they line up with their corresponding gears using the offset modifier.
Now, your previews should look like this:

--- Page 259 ---
Figure 7.17: The belts on the y-axis
All those belts and gears will be fully animated if you run the project in the
simulator. That leaves us with only two more groups to go – the gear shaft
and fan, and a background.
Adding the gear shafts
To bring the shafts into the scene, add the following code next:
//MARK: - GEAR SHAFTS
                Group{
                    ///Shaft 1
                    GearShaftView().offset(x: 5, y: 
28).                      zIndex(-1)
                    ///Shaft 2
                    GearShaftView().offset(x: 95, y: 
260).                      zIndex(-1)
                }
This is our GEAR SHAFT group. Here, I’m calling the GearShaftView struct
twice, to create two gear shafts. Then, all we have to do is simply offset
them to the proper locations, and call zIndex on them, passing in a negative
value. This will position them behind the other views, creating the illusion
that the shaft is actually part of the worm gear. Here’s what the previous
code produced:

--- Page 261 ---
Figure 7.18: The gear shafts
The worm gear and the gear shaft are the two objects that we could not
animate with conventional methods because that would not look good, and
it wouldn’t be an accurate representation of how they turn in the physical
world. So, we created our shadow boxes and placed them strategically over
these two shafts. When you run this in the simulator, you’ll notice these
rectangles appear to make the worm gear and two shafts turn.
Remember, these are just images that are sitting on the screen doing
nothing, but because of a little trickery, they actually appear like they’re
turning!
Now, let’s add the final group – the fan.
Adding the fan
It would be nice if all of these gears and belts would produce some sort of
output, so in this project, that output will be to spin a fan. Let’s now add the
final grouping of code right under the existing group:
  //MARK: - FAN
                Group {
                    ///Fan
                    FanView().offset(x: 0, y: 
250).frame(width: 140, height: 140)
                }
All we have done is called the FanView struct, offset it to the bottom of the
scene, and set a width for it (since it’s round, we don’t need to set a height).
Nearly there, just one last task: adding a background.
Adding the background
I have a nice gold background that’ll look great with all the objects against
it, so let’s come out of the main ZStack, and after its closing brace, add the

--- Page 262 ---
following code:
 //MARK: - BACKGROUND
.background(Image("goldBackground").resizable().aspectRatio(c
ontentMode: .fill)
            .frame(width: 400, height: 1000))
This sets the gold background to a frame width and height of 400 x 1000,
sitting nicely on an iPhone.
Finally, run that in the simulator and see what you think:

--- Page 264 ---
Figure 7.19: The completed project
Feel free to play around with all the parameters and settings, changing the
colors of the belts or objects, changing the angles of rotation, and so on.
This will allow you to really understand what these parameters and
functions all do, and how they synergistically work together!
Also, notice that we continued to use Pragma Marks throughout the project.
Let’s see how handy they are; so, come back up to the menu bar and click
on the last tab (this tab doesn’t have a name, but you can always find the
Pragma Marks in the last tab of the menu bar):
Figure 7.20: Viewing the Pragma Marks of the project

--- Page 265 ---
Every Pragma Mark indicates a different area of code based on the title we
gave it, which makes it very easy to jump to in an instant, regardless of how
big the file is.
Summary
In summary, through creating this project, we’ve accomplished quite a bit.
As before, you saw how to create separate files – in this case, gears and
chains – how to make a marching ants effect, how to combine everything
into ContentView, and how to organize the code neatly using Pragma
Marks and Groups. You also learned how to animate objects on all three
axes, x-, y-, and z-, and saw how to use zIndex to place views more
dynamically, from back to front, and vice versa.
In the next project, we will look at animating a flower and its petals so that
it appears to be breathing, and creating some snow in the background.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 266 ---
Animating a Bouquet of Flowers
Welcome to the next project. Here, we will create a bouquet of flowers,
animate the flower petals so they open and close, and then add a
smoke/vapor effect to make it look like the flower is breathing by using the
blur modifier.
Behind the flowers, we will place a winter backdrop, and make it snow too
by using the CAEmitter class. The CAEmitter class is a UIKit class that was
built for animation, but to be able to access it, we will need to use a SwiftUI
bridging protocol called UIViewRepresentable. The UIViewRepresentable
protocol will let us bridge the two frameworks, UIKit and SwiftUI.
Accompanying this, we will include two labels – Breathe In and Breathe
Out – so that you can breathe along with the flowers, similar to a
meditation app.
So, in this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and finished project from the Chapter 8
folder on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
Adding the variables and a winter background
Animating the text labels
Using the blur modifier to create a vapor effect
Animating the flower petals in an arc
Adding the flower bouquet and the animated breath
Creating falling snow in the scene

--- Page 267 ---
Adding the variables and a winter
background
Let’s get started and create a new SwiftUI project – I have called it
Breathing Flower.
Next, go ahead and download the assets for this project. The images are
bouquet, petal, smoke, snow, and winterNight. After you download them,
drop the images into the Assets catalog.
We now have the pictures we need loaded into the project. So, let’s start in
ContentView and add the variables we need to make this flower come alive:
import SwiftUI
struct ContentView: View {
    @State private var petal = false
    @State private var breatheInLabel = true
    @State private var breatheOutLabel = false
    @State private var offsetBreath = false
    @State private var diffuseBreath = false
    @State private var breatheTheBouquet = false
You should be familiar with the process of creating animating variables by
now. Here, we made a variety of variables, including the following:
Petal: To track the petal’s movements
breatheInLabel and breatheOutLabel: To track the Breathe In and
Breathe Out labels
offsetBreath: To move the breath from inside the flower to outside
the flower
diffuseBreath: To track the transformation of the smoke from a still
image to an animation
breatheTheBouquet: To keep track of the bouquet animation

--- Page 268 ---
Before we put these variables to use, let’s head into the body property and
add a winter image to the scene. First, create a ZStack in order to hold all of
the views that we will be adding:
var body: some View {
    ZStack {
        //MARK: - ADD A WINTER BACKGROUND - AND THE SNOW
        Image("winterNight").resizable()
          .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fill)
                            .frame(width: 400, height: 900)
       }
      }
This is familiar code to us now. Here, we are using the Image initializer and
passing in the background image called winterNight, which is in the assets
catalog. Then, we are resizing the image and using the aspectRatio option
of fill to take up the whole screen, before finally giving it some
dimensions with the frame modifier. This is what the scene looks like:

--- Page 270 ---
Figure 8.1: The winterNight background
Now that we have added the background to the scene, our next goal is to
add some labels: Breathe In and Breathe Out. What we want to achieve
here is to make the two labels grow and shrink at the same time as the
flower petals open and close, so these labels will have the same duration
and delay as the flower petals in the project, perfectly in sync.
Animating the text labels
Now, let’s add two labels that can act as a guide for the user to watch their
breath. Still working in the ZStack and moving directly underneath the
previous line of code, add another ZStack, and fill it with the following:
//MARK: - ANIMATE TEXT LABELS SO THEY GROW AND SHRINK
  //a ZStack so we can offset the entire scene vertically
  ZStack {
     Group {
        Text("Breathe In")
             .font(Font.custom("papyrus", size: 35))
             .foregroundColor(Color(UIColor.green))
             .opacity(breatheInLabel ? 0 : 1)
             .scaleEffect(breatheInLabel ? 0 : 1)
             .offset(y: -160)
             .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
               2).delay(2).repeatForever(autoreverses: 
               true), value: breatheInLabel)
                 Text("Breathe Out")
             .font(Font.custom("papyrus", size: 35))
             .foregroundColor(Color(UIColor.orange))
             .opacity(breatheOutLabel ? 0 : 1)
             .scaleEffect(breatheOutLabel ? 0 : 1)
             .offset(y: -160)
             .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
               2).delay(2).repeatForever(autoreverses: 
               true),value: breatheOutLabel)
            }
         }
Let’s dissect this code a little bit and see what we’re doing. First, we’re
adding a second ZStack, then a group, to help keep the code organized.

--- Page 271 ---
Next, we use the Text initializer and type in whatever text we’d like to
appear on the screen. In our case, we are typing in Breathe In and Breathe
Out, and just like that, we have text on the screen. Then, using the font
modifier, you can change the font to one of your choosing. Xcode comes
with many built-in fonts, and I am using one called papyrus.
Note
If you’d like to know the names of the fonts that you can use for iOS, you
can go to the following website: https://developer.apple.com/fonts/system-
fonts/.
As well as choosing the specific font type, we set the font size parameter to
35, and use the foregroundColor modifier to make the Breathe In label
green and the Breathe Out label orange.
Next, the opacity of the text labels is animated here by using the breatheIn
and breatheOut variables. When those variables are true, their opacity will
be set to 0, which makes the label text invisible. But when the breatheIn
and breatheOut variables are false, the text will be set to 1, and they will
become visible again.
After that, we set the size of the two text labels by using the scaleEffect
modifier. We’re using a ternary operator, which checks whether the
breatheIn and breatheOut variables are true or not; if so, then we will
scale the labels down to 0; otherwise, when the breatheIn and breatheOut
variables are true, we will scale the text labels back up to full size, which is
35 points.
The next line of code positions the label on the screen for the y axis, using
the offset modifier. Remember, the y axis position views vertically.
Lastly, we add the animation modifier. The animation will start as it
usually does when the breatheIn and breatheOut variables become true.
The animation will have a duration of 2 seconds, which means it will take 2
seconds to complete, and then it will have a delay of 2 seconds before
starting again.

--- Page 272 ---
And that completes the animation of the Breathe In and Breathe Out
labels. To see this in action, let’s add the onAppear modifier right after the
closing brace of the first ZStack:
   .onAppear {
                breatheInLabel.toggle()
                breatheOutLabel.toggle()
            }
As we’ve seen, onAppear will run the code in its body when the view first
appears – that is, when the user taps on the app to open it. The code we
want to run is the breatheIn and breatheOut variables; we want to toggle
them to their opposite Boolean value to start the animation.
When you run this code in the previews or the simulator, you’ll see two
labels, each with its own color, scaling up and scaling down, and at the
same time, fading in and out:

--- Page 273 ---
Figure 8.2: The Breathe In and Breathe Out labels added
That completes the labels. Now, let’s focus our attention on making an
image that looks like vapor to represent breath.
Using the blur modifier to create a
vapor effect
In this part of the project, we will be using the blur modifier, which will
apply a Gaussian blur to an image using a radius value that we specify. If

--- Page 274 ---
you’re not familiar with what a Gaussian blur is, this is a technique that is
widely used in image editing software (such as Photoshop) and works by
reducing the noise and detail of an image to create a smooth blurring visual
effect.
We will use an image of smoke, called breath (which is in the Assets
catalog), and apply the blur modifier to it, which will create a vapor effect
and make our flower look like it’s breathing.
There is very little code needed to achieve this effect. Coming out of the
previous group we made, let’s make a new group and add the following
code:
//MARK: - TAKE AN IMAGE AND CONVERT IT TO VAPOR (BREATH)
  USING THE BLUR MODIFIER
      Group {
          Image("breath").resizable().frame(width: 35,
            height: 125)
              .offset(y: offsetBreath ? 90 : 0)
              .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration:
                2).delay(2).repeatForever(autoreverses:
                true),value: offsetBreath)
              .blur(radius: diffuseBreath ? 1 : 60)
              .offset(x: 0, y: diffuseBreath ? -50 : -100)
              .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration:
                2).delay(2).repeatForever(autoreverses:
                true), value: showBreath)
      }.shadow(radius: showBreath ? 20 : 0)
           
In the group, we use the Image initializer and pass in the image we want to
use, breath. Then, we give it some dimensions, with a width of 35 and a
height of 125.
After that, the code offsets the image vertically on the y axis. Then, when
the offsetBreath variable becomes true, the image moves 90 points up, so
it’s coming out of the flower, and when offsetBreath is false, the image
moves back down and is set back to 0.
Next, we add the animation to the image and to the offset modifier (yes,
we can animate an offset modifier too!). We are using the same duration

--- Page 275 ---
and delay values as the text labels (2 seconds, respectively) so that the
labels and vapor animate in sync.
The next line is the blur modifier – this is what creates the magic of turning
the image into a puff of vapor. This modifier has a parameter called radius,
which accepts any integer number; the smaller the number, the less
Gaussian blur is applied to the image, whereas the larger the number, the
more blurred the image becomes. The ternary operator oversees the setting
of the radius value to either 1 or 60, so depending on whether the
diffuseBreath variable is true or false, we can control the amount of
Gaussian blur on the image. When diffuseBreath becomes true, the
image gets blurred by only 1 point, but when diffuseBreath becomes
false, the code will add 60 points of Gaussian blur to the image.
Let’s look at the next line of code – this is the offset modifier and is
responsible for positioning the blur. We want to offset the smoke so it
moves from inside the flower to outside the flower. This is accomplished by
checking the diffuseBreath variable; when it’s true, the vapor moves 50
points up, and when it’s false, the vapor moves 100 points down.
After that, the animation modifier will interpolate through all the Gaussian
blur values, from 1 to 60. In this interpolation (or looping, if you will), these
values will act on the image very quickly, so fast that the non-moving still
image of smoke will be transformed into an actual animation of smoke that
will move up and disperse, as real smoke does.
Note
You may also have noticed that we are using two animation modifiers here.
The reason for this is that the first one is placed right after the offset
modifier, so it is being used to animate the offset of the image up and down;
any code we add after that animation modifier will not be animated, hence
the use of the second animation modifier. The second one is used to
animate the blur modifier to make smoke and to animate the offset that
moves the smoke. So remember, the animation modifiers act on the views
above them, but if we need to add more of them, we can just add them as
needed to animate any subsequent views, as we have done here.

--- Page 276 ---
Lastly, we add the shadow modifier, which will add a subtle shadow of 20
points around the moving breath when it exits the flower.
Now, to see the smoke transformation, add the offsetBreath and
diffuseBreath variables to the onAppear modifier, like this:
   .onAppear {
                breatheInLabel.toggle()
                breatheOutLabel.toggle()
                offsetBreath.toggle()
                diffuseBreath.toggle()
            }
This is what we can see:
Figure 8.3: The smoke in our animation
As the animation starts out, the image of smoke is only being blurred by 1
point, but as the offset modifier moves the image upward, the blurring
increases all the way to 60 points. At 60 points, the once still image has now
been transformed into smoke, mimicking a breath.

--- Page 277 ---
As an aside, something interesting to check out later is that if you want to
see the process of the smoke image turning into moving vapor at any time,
then add this line of code beneath the shadow modifier:
 .zIndex(1)
This will move the smoke image to the front of the scene, and you will see
it being transformed into moving vapor.
With the vapor effect added, we can move on to the next step, which is
adding the bouquet of flowers to the image.
Animating flower petals in an arc
We have a background, text labels, and an inhaling and exhaling breath
effect; now let’s add the petals to the scene. We can add the petal code in a
separate file, so press Command + N to bring up the New File window, and
create a new SwiftUIView file called PetalView.
The goal here is to make five petals move in an arc, so they open and close.
We only need two variables for this, so this will be a very small file: we
need one Boolean (Bool) variable to track the animation, and another
variable to hold the number of rotations we want for each petal. Let’s add
them now:
    @Binding var petal: Bool
    var degrees: Double = 0.0
The Binding variable called petal will handle the animation. We are using
the Binding wrapper because we are in a new struct, and we will need to
use this variable in another struct, ContentView. When we prefix a variable
with the Binding wrapper, we can then use it (bind it) to another struct or
view.
Let’s now move into the body property and create a petal. Add the following
code:

--- Page 278 ---
struct PetalView: View {
  var body: some View {
      Image("petal").resizable().frame(width: 75, height:
        125)
          .rotationEffect(.degrees(petal ? degrees :
            degrees), anchor: .bottom)
          .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
            2).delay(2).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),
            value: petal)
  }
}
There are only three lines of code to look at:
To see the petal image in the previews, let’s modify the previews struct to
look like this:
struct PetalView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        PetalView(petal: .constant(true))
    }
}
The only change in the PetalView_Previews struct is that we use the petal
parameter and pass in the value of .constant(true). This turns the petal
variable to true, enabling the previews to display the contents of the
PetalsView struct.
First, we add the petal image from the Assets Catalog to the scene and
appropriately size it.
Next, we use the rotationEffect modifier to open and close the petal
by choosing between two degree values: one value for the petal
opening and one for its closing. We also anchor the rotation point to the
bottom of the petal, so the petals will open and close in an arc.
Then, we simply call the animation modifier to add the animation.
Again, we continue to keep duration and delay at 2 seconds and set
autoreverses to true.

--- Page 279 ---
Let’s now move back into ContentView, and call this new PetalView struct
five times to display all five petals:
//MARK: - ANIMATE FLOWER PETALS IN AN ARC
    Group {
        PetalView(petal: $petal, degrees: petal ? -25 : -5)
        ///middle petal does not move
        Image("petal").resizable().frame(width: 75, height:
          125)
        PetalView(petal: $petal, degrees: petal ? 25 : 5)
        PetalView(petal: $petal, degrees: petal ? -50 :
          -10)
        PetalView(petal: $petal, degrees: petal ? 50 : 10)
    }
The code calls PetalView four times to add four petals to the UI, and then
the fifth petal (the middle one) is added by a call to the Image initializer, as
this petal will not be animated. The result is shown here:

--- Page 280 ---
Figure 8.4: The petals
Notice the dollar sign syntax ($) for the petal parameter: that is how we
use the Binding variable in another struct. In the degrees parameter, we
have two values: again, one for when the petal is open, and one for when it
is closed. When the binding $petal property is true, the degrees value on

--- Page 281 ---
the left is used, and when the $petal property is false, the degrees value
on the right will be used.
Again, the middle petal will not be animated, so we only need to call the
Image initializer and then set its size. The remaining petals use the same
code; the only changes are the values for the degrees parameters.
And that completes the petals. Let’s see how they animate by toggling the
petal variable in the onAppear method, as we have done with the other
variables:
.onAppear {
            petal.toggle()
            breatheInLabel.toggle()
            breatheOutLabel.toggle()
            offsetBreath.toggle()
            diffuseBreath.toggle()
        }
The petals open and close as we have set them up – to a specific point,
rotating in an arc, and then closing again:


--- Page 282 ---
Figure 8.5: The petals animated
There are three components left to add to our project:
In the next section, we will implement the first two points: adding the
bouquet and the moving breath.
Adding the flower bouquet and the
animated breath
Adding the first component, the bouquet, is relatively easy, as it is stuff we
have already done; however, the second component, the moving breath, is a
little tricky (but not to worry, we will go slow and everything will be
explained).
So, first up, the bouquet. In ContentView, after the petal group’s closing
brace, add the following code:
 //MARK: - ADD A BOUQUET OF FLOWERS AND MAKE THEM EXPAND 
   AND CONTRACT SO THEY APPEAR TO BE BREATHING 
    Group {
      Image("bouquet").resizable()
      .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
            .frame(width: 300, height: 400)
            .rotationEffect(.degrees(37))
            .offset(x: -25, y: 90)
        ///breathe the bottom bouquet 1
            .scaleEffect(breathTheBouquet ? 1.04 : 1,
              anchor: .center)
            .hueRotation(Angle(degrees: breatheTheBouquet ?
              50 : 360))
            .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
              2).delay(2).repeatForever(autoreverses: 
A bouquet of flowers positioned directly over the petals
The moving breath surrounding the flowers
Snow falling in the background

--- Page 283 ---
              true), value: breatheTheBouquet)
        
      Image("bouquet").resizable()
        .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
            .frame(width: 300, height: 400)
            .rotationEffect(.degrees(32))
            .offset(x: -20, y: 95)
            .rotation3DEffect(.degrees(180), axis: (x: 0, 
              y: 1, z: 0))
        ///breathe the bottom bouquet 2
            .scaleEffect(breatheTheBouquet ? 1.02 : 1, 
              anchor: .center)
            .hueRotation(Angle(degrees: breatheTheBouquet ? 
              -50 : 300))
            .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
              2).delay(2).repeatForever(autoreverses: 
              true), value: breatheTheBouquet)
    }
This looks like a lot of code, but really, we are creating two bouquets using
very similar code. The reason why I’m using two bouquets and overlapping
them is to create the illusion of a full bunch of flowers.
Let’s now look at the code. We start with the grouping organizational
feature, and inside the group, we add the image for both bouquets. I’m
setting the aspect ratio to fit, so the bouquet image keeps its proportional
size, and framing the image with a value of 300 x 400.
Next, we call the rotation modifier on each bouquet, so we can rotate
them to the proper angle we want in the scene; a 37-degree rotation for the
first bouquet looks good, whereas 32 degrees for the second bouquet works
better for that one. Then, each bouquet gets offset a little bit on the x and y
axes, so they’re neatly positioned directly over the breath. This location will
help hide the breath, as we don’t want to see that until it animates up from
the bouquet.
The next line scales the bouquets up a little. The reason for this is that we
want to create the effect that the bouquets are breathing as well, along with
the petals. The top bouquet gets scaled up to 1.04, and the bottom bouquet
gets scaled to 1.02. Notice the top bouquet gets scaled up slightly more

--- Page 284 ---
than the bottom bouquet: this is because we wanted to stagger the two
bouquets a little.
Then, anchor is set to center, so the two bouquets will expand and contract
from that point.
The next line adds some hue rotation to the color of the bouquets so that
they will change color along with the animation. We previously used the
hueRotation modifier in Chapter 5, so that’s nothing new here, but we are
using different values for hueRotation to help make the bouquets more
varied in appearance.
Also notice that we use the rotation3DEffect modifier only on the bottom
bouquet. This is because the bouquet image for the top and bottom are
identical; they are simply one image that we’re using in two places, so by
using the rotation3DEffect modifier here and passing in a value of 1 for
the y parameter, this will flip the bouquet image on the y axis to the
bouquet’s opposite side. This helps give the overall look a more
symmetrical appearance.
Finally, we add the animation for both bouquets; this is the same animation
as we’ve done for the previous views, with a 2-second duration and a 2-
second delay, so all the animations are in sync.
Now, in order to see this animation in action, once again, we need to add
the animating variable in charge of the bouquet to the onAppear modifier.
So, add the following code to the onAppear modifier:
}.onAppear {
            breatheInLabel.toggle()
            breatheOutLabel.toggle()
            offsetBreath.toggle()
            diffuseBreath.toggle()
            petal.toggle()
            breatheTheBouquet.toggle()
        }
Now, if we run the app, we will see the two bouquets expanding and
contracting slightly, along with the petals moving too. You will also see the

--- Page 285 ---
bouquets’ colors changing, which is due to the hueRotation modifier we
used.
Figure 8.6: The bouquet moving
The bouquet expanding and contracting is a subtle look (it’s not pronounced
like the petals opening and closing), which is the look we’re going for here;
we just want to create a slight expanding effect.
With that done and our app already looking really good, we just need to add
one more component to the project: snow.
Creating falling snow in the scene
Making snow fall within your app really makes it come alive: it gives a
rather magical look to it and sets the right mood for our winter scene. To do
this, we need to utilize the power of UIKit and the UIViewRepresentable
protocol, along with the CAEmitter class.
Note

--- Page 286 ---
As you continue through the rest of this chapter, don’t worry if some of the
UIKit classes and methods look different or unfamiliar to you as compared
to the SwiftUI classes and methods we’ve been using. That’s because they
are different, and that’s for a whole different book if you’d like to learn
about UIKit. However, moving forward in this chapter, I will explain the
different UIKit properties and methods used to make the snow for our
animation, so you can get familiar with the process.
Adding the UIViewRepresentable
protocol
The UIViewRepresentable protocol is what’s called a wrapper for UIKit.
It allows SwiftUI to work with UIKit and use UIKits classes and methods.
If you’ve ever coded with UIKit, you’ll know it’s quite different compared
to SwiftUI. For one thing, it uses something called Storyboards, which are
a different way to design your layout and organize your views by way of
dragging and dropping objects from an object library, such as buttons and
sliders and text, and connecting them together on a big storyboard in
Xcode. The positioning of all those objects is completely different as well
and uses a system called Auto Layout, which is a system of methods and
rules to keep your objects spaced apart and located on the screen, but it was
very complicated and had a big learning curve.
SwiftUI eliminates Storyboards and Auto Layout and is a complete
departure from UIKit in how you design and build apps. It’s simpler and
uses much less code to achieve the same results (as you probably already
know). But, occasionally, we need to access some of the methods and
classes that UIKit offers in order to do different things in our apps – for
example, here, to make snow. That’s why we need the
UIViewRepresentable protocol.
The UIViewRepresentable protocol acts as a bridge between these two
different frameworks, UIKit and SwiftUI, and lets us access the classes and
methods we need.

--- Page 287 ---
So, let’s create a new file to contain the snow code. Press Command + N
and create a SwiftUIView file called SnowView. Then, at the top of the
struct, we will modify its heading to make it conform to the
UIViewRepresentable protocol. So, change the struct’s heading to this:
//MARK: - CREATE SNOW FALLING ON THE SCENE
struct SnowView: UIViewRepresentable { 
         }
When we add the UIViewRepresentable protocol to the struct’s heading
(right after the colon), this tells the system that we are now allowed to use
the classes and methods from the UIKit framework. It also means we have
to implement the required methods for this protocol. Some protocols only
need you to declare them into a struct heading, as we have just done, but
others also need you to implement some methods in order to satisfy the
protocol requirements.
Dealing with methods and errors
UIViewRepresentable requires that we add two methods to the struct:
makeUIView and updateView. But because we haven’t added those methods
yet, the change we just made will break our code and display an error:
SnowView does not conform to protocol UIViewRepresentable. That is
true because, as mentioned, we need to implement two methods to satisfy
this protocol.
So, let’s add the first method now, makeUIView, by adding the following
code to the SnowView struct:
func makeUIView(context: Context) -> some UIView {
    }
The makeUIView method returns UIView, which will contain the snow, so we
can use it in the ContentView later.
The second method we need to add is called updateView, which we can do
directly under the previous method:

--- Page 288 ---
func updateUIView(_ uiView: UIViewType, context: Context) {
    }
This method is used when we want to update the view with new data. Since
we don’t need to do any updating when the snow is made, we can leave this
method empty. However, it’s a required method so it does have to be here in
the SnowView struct; otherwise, the code won’t work.
Now that we have the two required methods, the protocol should be
satisfied. However, we still get an error: Function declares an opaque
return type, but has no return statements in its body from which to
infer an underlying type. This error refers to the makeUIView method and
the fact that it has no return code in its body. The makeUIView method needs
to return UIView (or simply, a view) in order for the error to go away. So,
let’s fill out the makeUIView method with the code that will return a view,
which will, in turn, make our snow.
First, we need to set up the size of the view to fit the screen correctly.
Remember, we are making a new view using UIKit’s classes and methods,
so we have to tell it how big the screen dimensions should be for this view.
Add the following code to the makeUIView method:
    func makeUIView(context: Context) -> some UIView {
    //configure the screen
            let screen = UIScreen.main.bounds
            let view = UIView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, 
              width: screen.width, height: screen.height))
            view.layer.masksToBounds = true
        }
The first line of code creates a constant that will hold the bounds of the
screen – that’s the rectangle of the screen from top to bottom and left to
right.
The second line of code creates the view that we will need to return when
we finish writing this method out. We’re setting the view to the size of the
screen’s width and height so that when we make the snow, we’re using the
entire boundaries of the iPhone screen, not just a little portion of it.

--- Page 289 ---
The next line of code uses the masksToBounds Boolean property and sets it
to true. The masksToBounds property indicates to the system whether
sublayers are clipped to the layer’s bounds.
Sublayers are layers or views that will be added later in the code.
Everything in code is made up of layers, code placed upon more code,
placed upon even more code. You have seen that, when working with a
ZStack, each view you place inside it gets stacked upon the previous view.
So with all this stacking up of views, there may be parts of a view that you
may not want to show, and other parts of that same view you do want to
show. The maskToBounds property will clip any subviews to the bounds of
the screen, which is helpful because we only want the snow to fall within
the size of the screen; we don’t want any snow in any surrounding areas off
the screen, only within the bounds of the screen, so we set this property to
true to clip off any excess.
Now, we need to return a view in order to silence this error. Remember, the
makeUIView method has a return statement in its declaration, so add the
following code at the end of our previous code:
func makeUIView(context: Context) -> some UIView {
    //configure the screen
            let screen = UIScreen.main.bounds
            let view = UIView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, 
              width: screen.width, height: screen.height))
            view.layer.masksToBounds = true
    
    return view
  }
Now, we have our screen size set up, we are returning a view, and we are
error-free! The next task is to create the snow, which we can do by using
UIKit’s CAEmitter class.

--- Page 290 ---
Adding the CAEmitter class
CAEmitter (which stands for Core Animation Emitter) is a class that has
methods and properties that let us emit, animate, and render particle
systems.
So what’s a particle system? A particle system is just what it sounds like: a
system that can produce hundreds or thousands of little particles on the
iPhone screen, in any size that we want, moving at any speed that we set,
and in any shape that we design.
The particle shape that we want has already been designed because we will
be using the snowflake image that we will drop into the assets catalog.
However, we have to design how many snowflakes to make, how fast to
make them move, how long to keep them on the screen, and the location on
the screen from which they are made.
So, let’s go ahead and create an emitter instance, using the CAEmitter
class. Add the following code just underneath the masksToBounds line of
code:
   //configure the emitter
    let emitter = CAEmitterLayer()
    emitter.frame = CGRect(x: 200, y: -100, width: 
      view.frame.width, height: view.frame.height)
The first line creates the emitter instance using the CAEmitter class.
The next line sets the location and size of the emitter. Here, we are locating
the emitter 200 points along the x axis, which is about the middle of the
iPhone screen, and -100 points along the y axis. This puts the emitter 100
points up and off from the iPhone screen. We put the emitter above the
visible portion of the screen because we don’t want to see the snowflakes
being created, we just want to see them falling.
As for the size of the emitter, we’re making it the exact size as the iPhone
screen, which means using the frame.width and frame.height values.

--- Page 291 ---
Now that we’ve designed our emitter, let’s design the cell. To explain the
difference between these two terms, think of the emitter as a box that holds
thousands of confetti particles, and each of those confetti particles is a cell.
In our case, our cell will be a snowflake.
To add our cell and make it move on screen, add the following code just
under the emitter code:
        //configure the cell
        let cell = CAEmitterCell()
        cell.birthRate = 40
        cell.lifetime = 25
        cell.velocity = 60
        cell.scale = 0.025
        cell.emissionRange = CGFloat.pi
        cell.contents = UIImage(named: "snow")?.cgImage
        emitter.emitterCells = [cell]
        view.layer.addSublayer(emitter)
Here, we created the cell instance using the CAEmitterCell class and
loaded it up with different properties. The following is a list of what these
properties do:
birthRate: How fast each cell or particle will be made. Using a value
of 40 mimics a gentle snowfall.
lifetime: How long to keep the cell on the screen before it’s removed.
Using a value of 25 ensures that each snowflake stays on the screen
long enough to make it to the bottom of the screen.
velocity: How fast we want the cell to move on the screen. We’re
using a value of 60, which is a speed that’s not too fast or too slow for
the snowflake.
scale: How big we want to make each cell. A value of .025 is a nice
size for the snowflake, as it’s not too big or too small for an iPhone.
emissionRange: How far we want to spread out the cells as they are
being emitted. For this value, we are using a mathematical expression
called Pi (often shown as the symbol π), which is defined as the
circumference of a circle divided by the diameter of the same circle.

--- Page 292 ---
As always, these cell configuration values are completely arbitrary, so go
ahead and experiment and make the snowflakes as big as you want, design
them how you want, and make them move on the screen according to what
you want them to do. There are no hard and fast rules when adding values
into a cell; it’s all about experimenting and having fun.
And with that, we have completed the snow file. If you want to test the
result, you can click Play; however, as the default background of the
preview is white, you won’t see our white snow. You can change this by
swapping the background color, like so:
struct SnowView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        SnowView()
            .background(Color.black)
    }
}
That will change the background color to black so you can see the snow;
however, as we know, we will be using a winter background for the final
animation.
Without getting too mathematical here, the CGFloat.pi value equals
180 degrees – imagine a horizontal line drawn from the left to the right
side of the phone screen; the value sets the snow to fall evenly from all
areas of that line.
contents: Sets the contents of the cell to an image of our choice,
which was set as the snow image (make sure that you’ve added the
image into the Assets Catalog so it can be accessed with this line of
code).
emitterCells: The cell particles that will become the snow.
addSublayer: Adds a new layer to the scene. Remember that in
SwiftUI, a layer is very similar to a view, and everything is a view in
SwiftUI (buttons, text, colors, and more). In the UIKit world, a layer
can also be thought of as a view – when the addSublayer function is
called, it will add whatever layer is in its parameter to the scene.

--- Page 293 ---
So, to finish things off, we need to call this SnowView file inside
ContentView. To do that, head back to ContentView and add this final line
of code right under the background code:
//MARK: - ADD A WINTER BACKGROUND - AND THE SNOW
  Image("winterNight").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: 
    .fill).frame(width: 400, height: 900)
  SnowView()
And that completes the project. You can now go ahead and run it:
Figure 8.7: The finished project

--- Page 294 ---
The project has a breathing label animation, a breathing petal animation, a
breathing bouquet animation, and a snow animation.
Summary
In this project, we created the illusion of a bouquet of flowers breathing by
using a collection of coding modifiers: we used blur to create the illusion
of smoke, and scale and rotationEffect to make the flowers expand and
contract in an arc, and we also added labels on the screen. On top of this,
we used the UIViewRepresentable protocol and the CAEmitter class, and
incorporated particle systems to create falling snow.
Here are some extra thoughts on how to take this app further, or just
practice adding some more features, to help stretch your skills with SwiftUI
animations. How about adding some sound to the project? We did that in
Chapter 4 with the Record Player project, and it’s very easy to do – you
could add some guided voice narration that simply says “breathe in, breathe
out” or some meditative music.
Or how about adding a button or slider that will change the speed of the
animation? Maybe you want to increase the petal opening and closing
speed. If you’re not sure how to do that, keep following along in the book
because, later, we will build a color game with a UI that uses buttons and
sliders.
Let’s continue to the next chapter, where we will see how to animate a
stroke modifier so it creates a moving line around any shape.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 295 ---
Animating Strokes around Shapes
In this project, we will take three images, create outlines around them, and
then animate strokes along those outlines. A stroke is a line that follows the
outline (or contours) of a shape, which we can give any color and thickness
and animate to move around the image.
To do this, you’ll learn how to convert bitmap images into vector images
using the Inkscape software, and then take those vectors and convert them
into Swift code using Sketch and Kite. We will then insert this code back
into Xcode so that we can start animating our project.
The following are the objectives for this project:
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and finished project from the Chapter 9
folder on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
You will also need the following:
Converting images into Swift code
Animating images with the stroke modifier
The Remove Background software, which is a free online tool you can
access here: https://www.remove.bg/upload
Inkscape, which is free and you can install here:
https://inkscape.org/release/inkscape-1.2.1/
Sketch, which you can install here: https://www.sketch.com/switch-to-
sketch/
Kite, which you can install here: https://kiteapp.co

--- Page 296 ---
Converting images into Swift code
In order to create the three outlines that we need, we first have to convert
images into vectors and then convert those vectors into Swift code. Why do
we have to convert an image into Swift code?
Well, in order to place an animating stroke around an image, we need a path
for the animation to follow. When the image has been translated into code,
it will then be easy to use Swift to follow the image outline.
However, there’s a problem: bitmaps. A bitmap, also called a raster image,
is a graphic that is created from different colored pixels, which together
form an image. Bitmaps can be very simple, just made up of two colors
(those would be black and white), or they can have many thousands or
millions of colors that produce photograph-quality images. Some examples
of bitmap formats that you will see use the file extensions PNG, JPEG, and
TIFF. With a bitmap image, there is no defined outline for any code to
follow, and thus it cannot have an animating stroke around it.
Vector images, on the other hand, are images created from code that have
sharply defined edges and never get blurry like a bitmap when you zoom in
on them. Since they are created with code, we can animate strokes around
those images.
If you want to animate a stroke around a bitmap image, there are three main
steps that you need to undertake:
So, let’s go through those steps now.
Removing the background of the image you want to use
Vectorizing the image into an SVG file
Translating the SVG file into Swift code

--- Page 297 ---
Removing the image backgrounds
Many images have a white or colored background, and in many cases, the
background is not needed. It’s easier to convert images into vectors if they
are against a transparent background.
In our project, the images that we will be using are an image of the word
“WE,” an image of a heart, and an image of the SwiftUI logo. We will
combine them in Swift so that they say, “We Love SwiftUI,” like so:

--- Page 298 ---
Figure 9.1: The images we will use in our project
You can download these from the GitHub repository, where you will notice
that the backgrounds have already been removed. However, if you are going
to use your own images, you will need to do this yourself.

--- Page 299 ---
We already explored how to remove backgrounds in Chapter 6 when we
animated the girl on the swing. You can refer back to that chapter; however,
to recap, you can use an online tool called Remove Background:
https://www.remove.bg/upload. You just have to click Upload Image and
choose the one you want to use. And that’s it – in about 20 seconds, the
website’s algorithms will find the background and remove it, leaving only
your subject. Then, all you have to do is download the new image file and
you’re good to go.
Alternatively, you can use Mac’s Preview app to remove the background, or
you can use paid software such as Affinity Designer. How you decide to
remove the background is up to you; experiment and try to see what works
best for the image you are using.
Also, although it’s not strictly necessary, it’s a good idea to crop your
image, as we only want to work with the image and not any surrounding
space. You can do this in pretty much any graphics editing program,
including the Preview app.
Now you can proceed to the next step, which is vectorizing the image.
Vectorizing the images
The second step will be to create vectors from the bitmap image. To do this,
we will need software with the proper algorithms to detect pixels, remove
them, and replace them with code that will draw the shapes instead. The
resulting code file will be a scalable vector graphics (.svg) file. One of the
best software options on the market is called Vector Magic. This software is
easy to use and automates the vectorization process with a click of a button
to start the process, but the downside is it costs around $300.
Alternatively, we can use Inkscape, which is free software that does a really
good job of tracing out a bitmap image and converting all its parts into
vectors. This is what we will use, and you can download the latest version
(at the time of writing) from the following link:
https://inkscape.org/release/inkscape-1.2.1/.

--- Page 300 ---
Tip
Even though Inkscape can work with color images, it’s usually better to
have your images in black and white; the algorithms work better with these
two colors. If you have color images, though, that’s not a problem – you can
still convert them into black and white by using a graphics program such as
Affinity Designer.
If you look at the images we are using for this project, two of them are in
color, but that’s okay because they have a limited number of colors and are
simple shapes. If you have more complicated shapes, for instance, such as a
portrait photograph with many colors in it, then it’s better to convert them
into black and white first.
Once you have Inkscape installed, you can get started. Grab one of your
images (in my case, I am choosing the “WE” image), right-click on it, and
open it in Inkscape. You will see this pop-up window:

--- Page 301 ---
Figure 9.2: Importing an image into Inkscape
Set Image Import Type to Embed, Image DPI to Default import
resolution, and Image Rendering Mode to None (auto). Then, click OK.
You will then see this screen:

--- Page 302 ---
Figure 9.3: The Inkscape editor with our image
Before continuing with the conversion, I want to show you how a bitmap
looks close up. On your Mac trackpad, pinch and zoom in very close to the
image; you will see pixelization and blurriness appear. This is one way you
can tell whether the image is a bitmap and not a vector. (Of course, the file
extension will also let you know whether it’s a bitmap or vector as well!)
Next, select your image on the Inkscape canvas (you will know it’s been
selected if you see black arrows around it), then go to the Path menu at the
top of the screen, and choose Trace Bitmap. This will open up the Preview
option on the right-hand side of Inkscape:

--- Page 303 ---
Figure 9.4: Inkscape Preview
In the Preview window, Inkscape shows us what the Trace Bitmap
function will be able to trace, and what the image will look like as a vector
graphic. Since the preview looks nearly identical to the “WE” image on the
canvas, there will be a complete outline around the image.
You can’t see the vector lines and points just yet in the preview, but you will
shortly.
Since we are using a black and white image, Inscape has selected the Single
scan option from the top of the Preview window (which you can see in
Figure 9.5).

--- Page 305 ---
Figure 9.5: The Inkscape scan option
The Single scan option is used for black and white images, but if we use a
multicolored image, then we need to select the Multicolor option. The
Multicolor option will scan your image, looking at the many colors it
contains, and do its best to trace an outline around each of those colors. This
is why I said earlier that it’s usually better to have a black-and-white image,
as there are fewer colors to scan and thus less chance of not getting a good
trace.
As highlighted in Figure 9.5, you can also adjust the Threshold and Details
sliders to get the best possible image in the previews. These sliders are
useful if Inkscape is having difficulty getting a good scan. By moving the
sliders, you can fine-tune the parts of the image that Inkscape can see.
Let’s look at the Details sliders:
We will see the Threshold slider later when creating a stroke around the
heart.
What we want to see in the preview is an image that is as close to the one in
the center canvas as possible. When we do see this, it means that Inkscape
can trace all around the shape on the canvas correctly and capture all the
vector lines. If you don’t see an image that’s close to the original, then try
and adjust some of the sliders I just mentioned to fine-tune the output.
The Speckles slider will ignore the small spots in the vector – when set
to maximum, it will ignore more speckles, and when set to minimum, it
will ignore fewer speckles.
The Smooth corners slider will smooth out any sharp corners that are
in the trace.
The Optimize slider will try to optimize paths by joining adjacent
Bezier curve segments together; this means that the Optimize slider
will try its best to remove as many vector nodes as it can. When you
have fewer nodes in a vector image, there tends to be better tracing and
fewer jagged edges.

--- Page 306 ---
Once you have finished adjusting the image so it looks close to the original,
click Update Preview, and then Apply. Inkscape places its newly created
vectors directly over the original image. To see the result, click on the
“WE” image in the editor and drag the new vectors to the side:
Figure 9.6: Creating the vectors
You can now delete the original image, as it is no longer needed.
Let’s have a look at what Inkscape has done for us – it has traced the
original image and created a new image that is now made of vector paths.
To see the difference, pinch and zoom on your Mac trackpad on the new
vector image as you did with the bitmap image. Do you see the difference?
There is no pixelation or blurriness at all, as the image is created with code
rather than pixels; the image can be blown up to any size and it will still
remain sharp and crisp along its edges and curves:

--- Page 307 ---
Figure 9.7: Vector resolution
Now, remember that I mentioned that you will be able to see the vectors
that Inkscape has created? Well, they are there, it’s just that we need to
select the right editing tool to see them. Select the image in the center of the
canvas, go to the left toolbar, and select the Node Editing tool. When you
click on that tool, you will be able to see all the vector lines that Inkscape
created:

--- Page 308 ---
Figure 9.8: The vectors
Each of those small squares is a point (or node) that links lines, curves, and
corners to make this new shape – and these points can now be edited by
clicking on them and dragging them to any location to reshape the vector
image.
With the new vectors created, we can export them. To do this, open File at
the top menu and choose Export. Then, you can choose the export options
at the bottom right of the software. Choose the file type that you want to
export to – we want a Plain SVG (*.svg) file. Then, click on the Export
button:

--- Page 309 ---
Figure 9.9: Exporting to an SVG file
Now, we have an SVG file stored on our computer, ready to be translated
into Swift code. Do the same process for any of the other images that you
want to use in this project – whether you are using your own images or
following along with the book’s project images – and then you can proceed
to the next step.
Translating the SVG file into Swift
code
Let’s continue. We have an SVG file ready for the next step. An SVG file is
a file written in XML, and XML is a markup language used for storing and
transferring digital information. The XML code in an SVG file creates all of
the shapes, colors, and text that comprise the image. We will be turning that
XML code into Swift code shortly, but first, we need to edit the images’
dimensions and we can do that in Sketch.
So, first, open the SVG “WE” image in Sketch. Then, in the Utilities area
on the right, we can size the image however we like; in my case, I have set
the width to 250. To set this, make sure that the little lock icon in between
the width and height fields is selected so that it’s locked – this will keep the
correct proportions for the image – and hit Enter:

--- Page 310 ---
Figure 9.10: Sizing the image
And that’s all we need to do in Sketch. Now, minimize your Sketch
document (but don’t close it!).
Next, we need a program that can turn XML code into Swift code. One
option is Paint Code – although it is a great program, it costs around $200
per year for a subscription. Instead, we will use Kite – although this is
currently $99 to buy outright with no subscription, you can always use the
free trial to follow along with this project.
So, open up Kite. Then, click on File | Import | From Sketch…:

--- Page 311 ---
Figure 9.11: Importing from Sketch into Kite
You will then see a pop-up window asking how you would like to import
the layers. Leave the default settings as they are, but make sure that Import
text layers as is set to Image Layers and that Import images at is set to a
scale of 1x:

--- Page 312 ---
Figure 9.12: Import From Sketch settings
Then, click on Import. You now have your image in Kite and are ready to
turn it into Swift code, and that process is as simple as clicking one button,
the Code button, at the top of the screen:


--- Page 313 ---
Figure 9.13: Converting the file into Swift code
The Swift code that is generated shows up in the bottom console, which you
can resize like the Xcode console by dragging it upwards. Here is what the
code console looks like for the “WE” image, containing all the Swift code
that makes up its length, thickness, colors, position, and more:
Figure 9.14: The generated Swift code in Kite
That looks like a lot of code just to create an image with two letters, doesn’t
it? Well, yes, but there are a lot of things the code is doing – it’s mapping
out all the paths needed to create the lines and curves that form the shape.
Let’s now get this code into Xcode. First, create a new Xcode project if you
haven’t done so already – I’ve called it Animating Strokes. Then, all we
have to do is copy a small segment of it from Kite. You should copy the
code starting from here:
let pathPath = CGMutablePath()

--- Page 314 ---
And continue all the way down the file until you reach these two lines:
 pathPath.closeSubpath()
 pathPath.move(to: CGPoint(x: 159, y: 104.854378))
So, we just want to copy all the code that starts with pathPath; everything
else we don’t need.
Now, before we enter Xcode, let’s summarize what we have done so far. We
have taken a bitmap image, removed its background and cropped it, opened
it with Inkscape and turned it into a vector image, and then finally imported
that vector into Kite, where we turned it into Swift code. This process will
get faster with more practice.
Let’s now proceed to Xcode and start making all this code work.
Animating images with the stroke
modifier
In the following sections, we will be working in Xcode and refactoring the
“WE” code somewhat in order to make it work in our project. We will use
the Shape protocol that lets us draw a 2D shape using its path() function,
and then use the stroke modifier to add a moving line around the path of
our shapes. We will also get started on animating our heart and SwiftUI
logo images.
Creating a stroke animation on the
“WE” image
To start animating the “WE” image, we need to create a file inside the
project. Press Command + N, choose a SwiftUI View file type, and name it
– I’m calling it WeView.

--- Page 315 ---
Then, create a struct at the bottom of the file; this will be the struct that
conforms to the shape protocol, allowing us to create 2D shapes by using
the path function:
struct WeTextShape: Shape {
    func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
    }
}
Now, we can paste in the code that we copied from the Kite program and
place it right into that path function. This code is quite repetitive and long,
as it is drawing a shape and must repeat itself for every line, curve, and
corner. So, for the sake of brevity and to not take up too much space, I will
just provide the beginning and end of the code (however, you can find the
complete code in the GitHub repo):
struct WeTextShape: Shape {
  func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
    let pathPath = CGMutablePath()
      pathPath.move(to: CGPoint(x: 33.544579, y: 
        105.919167))
      pathPath.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: 20.994799, y: 
        60.169167), control1: CGPoint(x: 32.057159, y: 
        101.184097), control2: CGPoint(x: 29.932928, y: 
        93.440262))
      pathPath.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: 3.45976, y: 
        7.26897), control1: CGPoint(x: 8.184458, y: 
        12.4843), control2: CGPoint(x: 7.749718, y: 
        11.17275))
      pathPath.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: 0, y: 0.16917))
      .......................................................
.
      pathPath.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: 236.485107, y: 
        93.6082), control1: CGPoint(x: 237.051361, y: 
        79.890518), control2: CGPoint(x: 236.884613, y: 
        86.149673))
      pathPath.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: 235.758789, y: 
        107.169159))
      pathPath.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: 197.379395, y: 
        107.169159))
      pathPath.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: 159, y: 107.169159))
      pathPath.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: 159, y: 104.854378))
      pathPath.closeSubpath()

--- Page 316 ---
      pathPath.move(to: CGPoint(x: 159, y: 104.854378))
  }
}
When you paste the code into Xcode, you will get some errors – don’t
worry about these, as the code needs to be reworked a little bit anyway.
Fixing these issues is also a good excuse for me to show you how to
refactor code in SwiftUI. Refactoring is a helpful feature that allows us to
rename code or remove and replace different parts of code throughout
multiple files in your project without having to search through all your files
looking for each instance that needs refactoring and manually changing it.
One thing we want to change is the name of the pathPath constant, which
is the first line of code inside the path function that was pasted in. This
constant seems to have been named twice because it was exported from
Inkscape. However, it should simply be named path.
So, to refactor this, just Command + click on the pathPath variable and
select Rename. You will see Xcode highlight every instance of pathPath in
the file, and all you have to do is just type in the new name, path, and hit
Enter.
That’s our first revision of the code that we copied over. The next revision
is to change the class that’s being assigned to the path constant. Currently,
the path constant is assigned as a CGMutablePath() instance, which is a
core graphics class used for drawing shapes and lines. Working in SwiftUI
though, nearly everything is built with structs, so we need to use the Path()
struct instead. Also, change the let keyword to the var keyword, because
we need the path variable to be mutable, meaning its value can be changed.
With those modifications done, the first line of the code in your path
function should look like the following:
var path = Path()
Now, let’s add one more line of code to this path function. At the very end
of the function, we need to return the path variable, and to do so, we use

--- Page 317 ---
the return keyword, followed by the variable the function must return; so,
add this line at the bottom of the path function:
return path
The following are the changes we made to the start and end of the path
function:
func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
    var path = Path()
    path.move(to: CGPoint(x: 33.544579, y: 105.919167))
    path.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: 3.45976, y: 7.26897), 
      control1: CGPoint(x: 8.184458, y: 12.4843), control2: 
      CGPoint(x: 7.749718, y: 11.17275))
       •••SHAPE CODE HERE•••
    return path
  }
When you press Command + B, the code should be error-free.
Now let’s see what all of that Kite code is actually doing.
The path() function will return a shape according to the points, lines, and
curves that are drawn inside it. The first line of code inside the path()
function is creating a path instance; this will draw the shape, and you can
think of this variable as the pencil moving along the canvas.
The second line of code is the move() function. This is what sets the starting
location for the path variable to move to. The locations are based on the
Cartesian coordinate system and an X and Y location are used to position
the path variable.
In the third line of code, the path variable calls the addCurve() function,
and this does what it says – it adds a Bezier curve to the path using the
specified points. Continuing down our code, we see that the path variable
also calls the addLine() function, and this will add a line to the path using
the specified points. The code continues to call these two functions,
addCurve() and addLine(), quite a bit until the path variable needs to

--- Page 318 ---
finish off a particular path in the drawing and close off the ends of that
finished line before moving on to the next line in the drawing.
The finished line is closed off using the closeSubpath() function and
directly proceeded by the moveTo() function to start a new line in the
drawing. So, as you can see, there are several lines drawn in this code to
make up the finished shape.
And finally, at the end of all this code, the path() function returns the path
variable, which now contains a finished shape inside of it, ready to be
displayed on the iPhone screen.
Next, continuing to work in the same file, we need to come into the WEView
struct and add the code to display this shape.
Starting at the top of the struct, add the following variables:
//MARK: - VARIABLES
    @State var strokeReset: Bool = true
    @State var startStroke: CGFloat = 0.0
    @State var endStroke: CGFloat = 0.0
Next, inside the body property, add a ZStack:
var body: some View {
    ZStack {
    }
  }
Inside the ZStack, let’s add a Group, and then the following code to display
the shape in the preview:
 ZStack {
        Group {
            //SHAPE OUTLINE
            WeTextShape()
                .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 0.5, 
                  lineCap: .round, lineJoin: .round))
                .foregroundColor(.gray)

--- Page 319 ---
        }
    }
Inside Group, we call the WeTextShape struct and add the stroke modifier
directly to it. This modifier will create a new shape that has a stroke on it,
which is styled according to the StrokeStyle function. The StrokeStyle
function adds a lineWidth property of 0.5, and sets both lineCap (the ends
of the stroke) and lineJoin to round; this joins the ends of the stroke with a
semi-circular arc. Finally, the color of the stroke shape is set to gray.
This completes the shape – we won’t add any animation to it, as we just
want it to be a stationary shape. Instead, we will add this shape again,
directly over the first one, and that’s the one we will animate in color. Let’s
add that now.
Continuing inside the Group view, and directly under the last line of code,
add the following:
    Group {
        //SHAPE OUTLINE
        WeTextShape()
            .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 0.5, 
              lineCap: .round, lineJoin: .round))
            .foregroundColor(.gray)
        //ANIMATING STROKE
        WeTextShape()
            .trim(from: startStroke, to: endStroke)
            .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 5, 
              lineCap: .round, lineJoin: .round))
            .foregroundColor(Color.red)
    }.offset(x: 75, y: 50)
  )
   }
And that’s the code that will add a second shape, identical to the first one,
directly over it.
As we did for the non-moving shape, we called the WeTextView struct to
create the shape. Then, we used the trim modifier to trim the shape by a
fractional amount based on the values that get passed into its parameters.
By passing in the startStroke variable as the location of the start of the

--- Page 320 ---
stroke animation and the endStroke variable to tell the trim modifier where
to stop, a stroked line will be drawn along the shape’s path from start to
end. The length of that stroke line will depend on the values inside the
startStroke and endStroke variables.
As we did with the first shape, we also used the strokeStyle modifier to
style the stroke with a width property of 5, and lineCap and lineJoin set
to round. This time, we set the color to red so that the moving stroke will
stand out as it travels along the gray shape underneath it.
Then, finally, we’re using the offset modifier to center the shape inside the
preview in the middle from left to right, and toward the top of the iPhone.
Now, the code for the outline and animating the stroke are complete. What’s
needed next is to use the onAppear modifier to start the animation and set
up some timers so that the stroke can proceed at a certain speed. Add the
final bit of code right after the closing brace of the ZStack:
.onAppear() {
    Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval: 0.23, repeats: 
      true) { timer in
        if (endStroke >= 1) {
            if (strokeReset) {
                Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval: 0.6, 
                  repeats: false) { _ in
                    endStroke = 0
                    startStroke = 0
                    strokeReset.toggle()
                }
                strokeReset = false
            }
        }
        withAnimation(Animation.easeOut) {
            endStroke += 0.12
            startStroke = endStroke - 0.4
        }
    }
  }
This code might look a little busy to grasp at first, but let’s break it down
for clarity.

--- Page 321 ---
The onAppear() method is called on the ZStack container; this method is
triggered when the view appears on the screen. Inside the method, a timer is
scheduled using the Timer.scheduledTimer method, which is set to repeat
every 0.23 seconds. This is the amount of time it takes for the animation to
draw each stroke segment. A stroke segment is how we draw out the shape,
in segments, one at a time. You can experiment with this timer’s interval
value – a larger number will draw the stroke segments slower, and a smaller
number will draw the segments faster, creating a smooth animating line
around the shape.
Next, we want the animation to repeat, so we set the repeats parameter to
true. Within the timer’s event handler, the code first checks whether the
endStroke variable is greater than or equal to 1. If this is true, the code then
checks whether the strokeReset variable is true. If both of these
conditions are met, another timer is scheduled using the
Timer.scheduledTimer method. This timer is set to run only once, after
0.6 seconds, and within this timer’s event handler, the values of endStroke
and startStroke are reset to 0, so the stroke animation can once again start
at the beginning, and the strokeReset variable is toggled. After the inner
timer is scheduled, the strokeReset variable is set to false.
The withAnimation function is different from the animation modifier we
have used in past projects. Remember in Chapter 2, when we talked about
the two types of animations, implicit and explicit? The withAnimation
function is an explicit type of animation and is used to animate changes to
the view’s state. It is considered an explicit animation because it requires
you to specify the animation that you want to use, as opposed to an implicit
animation, which would automatically animate changes without the need
for additional code.
So, in the body of the withAnimation function, we set the endStroke
variable to increase its value by 0.12 after every iteration of the animation.
We also set startStroke to a value that is calculated by subtracting 0.4
from endStroke – this computation creates the length and speed of an
animating stroke that I think looks pretty good for the “We” shape.
And with that, this animation is complete. So, to summarize the code in the
WeView struct, it creates a view that animates a shape, this shape is outlined

--- Page 322 ---
twice, once with a gray color and a small stroke, and then again, with a red
color and a bigger stroke. The animation is controlled by the startStroke
and endStroke variables, which are incremented over time. The animation
will be repeated once the endStroke variable reaches 1, and there is a 0.6-
second delay before the animation starts again.
Now that we have finished with the code, if you click on the Update
Preview button, you will see that the outline is now a red, five-point line.
Again, these two values are very customizable for different looks for this
animation. By increasing the value of endStroke in the withAnimation
function, you can leave more of the stroke line on the shape or less of it,
depending on the look you want to go for.
Play around with the values and experiment. You can create a flashing
stroke by increasing the speed, or you can have a very slow-moving stroke.
You can stroke the entire shape with a short line, or you can go with a very
long line along the whole shape.
That completes our first animation, the “WE” image stroke. Even though
that seems like a long process, the whole thing actually only takes a few
minutes once you get familiar with the different programs and techniques
used. We are going to move on to the heart image now and repeat the same
process. After all, practice makes perfect!
Creating a stroke animation on the
heart image
Okay, we have animated our first image, so we are going to follow the same
process again for two more images. The next image will be a heart – for this
one, we will animate a stroke around it as we did with the letters, but also
we will add the heart image back into the scene.
If you are following along with the book’s project, you can find the heart
image in the GitHub repository, where the background has already been
removed. However, if you are using your own images, you will need to do
this yourself.

--- Page 323 ---
After you have prepared your image, now open it with Inkscape so that you
can vectorize it. With the image selected in the editor, go to the Path menu
at the top and choose Trace Bitmap; this will trace the image and prepare it
for vectorization, as before.
With the image selected on the canvas, if you look at the Previews pane at
the right, the image has been converted into black and white. That’s
because, by default, Inkscape selects the Single Scan option, the option for
black-and-white images. And even though this is a color image, because it’s
such a simple shape with not many variations of red in it, we don’t need the
Multicolor option; so, Single scan will work fine here.
This is also a good opportunity to use the Smooth Corners option as well
because this shape has (for the most part) smooth corners, and this selection
will preserve them.
This is what it should look like so far:
Figure 9.15: The heart image in Inkscape
Also, do you notice that the heart image shown in Preview has two white
areas inside it? That’s the Inkscape algorithm trying to capture the shiny

--- Page 324 ---
parts of the red heart image on the canvas. We only want to trace the outside
perimeter of the heart, which is the area that will be outlined later in the
code – we don’t want those white areas. To remove those white areas in the
preview, slide the Threshold slider to the right, just enough so the heart
fills up like this:
Figure 9.16: Setting the options in Inkscape for the heart image
Now that the heart shape is ready to be vectorized, click the Apply button
to complete the process, and a new vectorized black heart is placed directly
over the red heart image on the canvas. Drag the black heart off to the side,
in order to see the red heart under it, then delete the red heart.
Next, position the black heart back over the white canvas and export it like
the “WE” image, making sure to choose the Plain SVG (*.svg) file type.
Moving away from Inkscape and into the Sketch program, open the new
vector image we just exported from Inkscape into Sketch by right-clicking
on the image and selecting Open with Sketch. We will resize the image
again to a width of 250 (again, making sure to click on the lock icon to fix
the proportions):

--- Page 325 ---
Figure 9.17: Setting the size for the heart image in Sketch
Next minimize the Sketch window, as we only need it running in the
background so that Kite can access it, and open the Kite program. In Kite,
click on File, then Import, and then From Sketch. You will see the same
window as shown in Figure 9.12, and you can keep the default settings.
Then, click Import.
Once the image has been imported, select the image on the canvas, and then
click the Code button at the top to generate the Swift code we need:

--- Page 326 ---
Figure 9.18: Generating the heart’s Swift code in Kite
Like we did with the “WE” image code, we just want to copy the code that
starts with the pathtPath name. In the example here, the code we need
starts at the let pathPath = CGMutablePath() line and ends with
pathPath.move(to).
Now back to Xcode – create a new SwiftUI View file, which I will name
HeartView. Inside the file, we will create a struct to put the code in, call it
HeartShape, and make it conform to the shape protocol, like this:
struct HeartShape: Shape {
    func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
    }
 }
Remember when making the “WE” shape, we used the shape protocol? As
before, it requires us to use the path() method, which I have added here.

--- Page 327 ---
Now, we can paste the Kite-generated Swift code inside this method (again,
I will only include the first few lines and the last few lines so as not to take
up too much space here; as before, the complete code file and project are
available in the GitHub repo):
struct HeartShape: Shape {
  func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
    let pathPath = CGMutablePath()
       pathPath.move(to: CGPoint(x: 245.632095, y: 
         460.368713))
       pathPath.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: 221.824585, y: 
         420.429504), control1: CGPoint(x: 240.765762, y: 
         449.02652), control2: CGPoint(x: 231.057922, y: 
         432.740723))
........................................................
      pathPath.closeSubpath()
       pathPath.move(to: CGPoint(x: 245.632095, y: 
         460.368713))
    }
 }
Next, let’s refactor the code as we did before. Command + click on the
pathPath instance and choose Rename, then simply name it path. Also,
change the mutability of the path constant to a variable by replacing let
with var, and change CGMutablePath() to Path(). These changes should
look like this:
var path = Path()
The last change to make is at the bottom of the HeartShape struct; after the
very last line of code, we need to return the path we created, so add the
following line of code to the end of the path function:
return path
The code should now build cleanly, and we can move on to animating the
outline around the heart. This is similar code to that in the WEView file. At
the top of the struct, let’s add the following variables:

--- Page 328 ---
//MARK: - VARIABLES
    @State var strokeReset: Bool = true
    @State var startStroke: CGFloat = 0.0
    @State var endStroke: CGFloat = 0.0
The strokeReset variable will keep track of the animation, startStroke
will hold a value that sets the length property of the stroke at the
beginning, and endStroke will hold a value that sets the length property of
the stroke at the end.
Moving into the body property of the struct, let’s add the views needed to
display and animate our heart outline:
var body: some View {
  ZStack {
    Group {
      //SHAPE OUTLINE
      HeartShape()
          .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 0.5, 
            lineCap: .round, lineJoin: .round))
          .foregroundColor(.gray)
      //ANIMATING STROKE
      HeartShape()
          .trim(from: startStroke, to: endStroke)
          .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 5, lineCap: 
            .round, lineJoin: .round))
          .foregroundColor(Color.white)
  }.offset (x: 75, y: -30)
  }.onAppear() {
    Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval: 0.23, repeats: 
      true) { timer in
        if (endStroke >= 1) {
          if (strokeReset) {
              Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval: 0.6, 
                repeats: false) { _ in
                  endStroke = 0
                  startStroke = 0
                  strokeReset.toggle()
              }
              strokeReset = false
          }
      }
      withAnimation(Animation.easeOut) {
          endStroke += 0.12

--- Page 329 ---
          startStroke = endStroke - 0.4 
      }
    }
  }
}
The code here is almost identical to the code in the WEView file – what’s
different is the color of the stroke. Here, it is white and we are offsetting the
heart to be lower on the screen.
Run the code and you’ll see that there is a smoothly animating stroke going
around the heart shape.
Again, all the values are for you to explore and experiment with to create
the look you want.
But let’s do something a bit different for this shape – let’s add the actual
heart bitmap image right inside the animating heart shape. To do this, add
the following code at the bottom of the Group view:
Group {
      //SHAPE OUTLINE
      HeartShape()
          .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 0.5, 
            lineCap: .round, lineJoin: .round))
          .foregroundColor(.gray)
      //ANIMATING STROKE
      HeartShape()
          .trim(from: startStroke, to: endStroke)
          .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 5, lineCap: 
            .round, lineJoin: .round))
          .foregroundColor(Color.blue)
      ///HEART BITMAP IMAGE
      Image("heart").resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: 
        .fit)
          .frame(width: 246, alignment: .center)
          .position(x: 125, y:117.5)
     }
Run the code again and you’ll see that it performs as before, only now
we’ve positioned the heart bitmap image inside the stationary stroke, so the
animated stroke is tracing the heart image for an interesting look:

--- Page 331 ---
Figure 9.19: The stroke around the heart image
We have completed two shapes now, the “WE” letters and the heart. Let’s
continue and add the final image to the project, the SwiftUI logo.
Creating a stroke animation on the
SwiftUI logo image
Now that we have reached the final image, I would like to challenge you by
letting you take this one on by yourself. Use the steps we have outlined in
the previous two shapes – including removing backgrounds, vectorizing
your image, and converting the image into Swift Code – and copy the code
into a new SwiftUI View file called SwiftUILogoView.
Okay, give it a try, and come back here when you’re ready…
How did you do?
After you vectorize a few shapes and gather the code, the process will
become very familiar and much quicker. If you have used images other than
the ones I supplied for this project, that’s perfectly fine; just know that the
SwiftUI code for those images will be different from the code I will show
here for the SwiftUI logo, but the animating code will be the same.
Here is the SwiftUI code that I got back from Kite for the SwiftUI logo
image (and as before, the full code file is available in the GitHub repo):
struct SwiftUILogoShape: Shape {
  func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
    var path = Path()
    path.move(to: CGPoint(x: 201.374207, y: 235.109955))
    path.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: 231.023102, y: 
      220.544876), control1: CGPoint(x: 212.656006, y: 
      233.244553), control2: CGPoint(x: 222.89035, y: 
      228.216904))
   ........................................................
     path.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: 207.854324, y: 
       191.140839), control1: CGPoint(x: 209.692215, y: 
       193.796051), control2: CGPoint(x: 208.764877, y: 

--- Page 332 ---
       192.663177))
     path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: 207.854324, y: 
       191.140839))
     path.closeSubpath()
     path.move(to: CGPoint(x: 207.854324, y: 191.140839))
        return path
    }
}
I have previously explained how this code creates a shape object in the
Creating a stroke animation on the “WE” image section; if you would like
a refresher on understanding how this works, go back to that section for the
details on this code.
We can now move to the top of the file, inside the SwiftUILogo struct, and
start adding the animation code. I will add the complete code for this final
shape:
struct SwiftUILogoView: View {
    //MARK: - VARIABLES
    @State var strokeReset: Bool = true
    @State var startStroke: CGFloat = 0.0
    @State var endStroke: CGFloat = 0.0
    var body: some View {
      ZStack {
        Group {
          //SHAPE OUTLINE
              SwiftUILogoShape()
          .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 0.5, 
            lineCap: .round, lineJoin: .round))
          .foregroundColor(.gray)
      //ANIMATING STROKE
      SwiftUILogoShape()
          .trim(from: startStroke, to: endStroke)
          .stroke(style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 5, lineCap: 
            .round, lineJoin: .round))
          .foregroundColor(Color.blue)
  }.offset(x: UIScreen.main.bounds.size.width / 5.5)
    }.onAppear() {
  Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval: 0.23, repeats: 
    true) { timer in
      if (endStroke >= 1) {
          if (strokeReset) {
              Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval: 0.6, 

--- Page 333 ---
                repeats: false) { _ in
                  endStroke = 0
                  startStroke = 0
                  strokeReset.toggle()
              }
              strokeReset = false
          }
      }
      withAnimation(Animation.easeOut) {
          endStroke += 0.12
          startStroke = endStroke - 0.4 
        }
      }
   }
  }
}
This animating code is the same code that we have been adding all along,
and if you would like an explanation of how it works, go back to the “WE”
shape code for all the details. The minor differences here are that the line is
blue, and we are offsetting it lower on the screen.
Give this a run and check out the stroke around the logo.
The final part of the project is to combine all three of the shape structs onto
the screen together. Let’s do that next.
Combining the animated strokes
There is very little code needed for this, as we are just calling the three
shape structs in one place. All you need to do is add the following code to
the ContentView struct:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack  {
            WeView()
            HeartView()
            SwiftUILogoView()
        }.background(Color.black)

--- Page 334 ---
    }
}
What we have done here is called all three structs inside ContentView, used
a VStack to line up the views vertically, and then added a black background
at the end. When you run the code, you will see the following result:

--- Page 336 ---
Figure 9.20: The finished project
Now, all three views are animated as being outlined with different colors.
Summary
Nice job finishing this project! To create the finished animation, we learned
how to turn bitmap images into vector files, and then how to turn those
vector files into code that we can work with using SwiftUI. Also, we
learned how to create and animate a moving outline around almost any
shape using the stroke modifier and timers, and used animation in this
project.
Using this project, you can play around with the values. You can make the
stroke thicker or thinner, make it move faster or slower, and make it any
color of the rainbow.
There are many applications for animating strokes in your apps, too. It can
be used for logos, text, and brands, so that they stand out and get noticed; it
can be used in game apps to bring the users’ attention to different areas of
the screen or can be used anywhere you want to make an app come alive.
The uses are only limited by your imagination.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to animate lines in a different way to
create waves, and then put them together to make an ocean with an
animating buoy, complete with sound effects.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 337 ---
Creating an Ocean Scene
In this chapter, we will be creating an ocean scene. To do that, we will be
revisiting the Shape protocol and path function that we used in the previous
project to create the waves, as well as a new SwiftUI property called
animatableData, which will help to make our curvy lines animate in a fluid
wave-like motion.
We will also add an image of a buoy to our scene and animate it in multiple
different ways, including moving it along an anchor point, rotating it around
the center of this point, and making it rise up and down along the y-axis –
so the buoy looks like it’s bobbing in the water.
Finally, we will add some sound effects to the project to help it really come
alive.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and finished project from the Chapter 10
folder on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
Adding the wave’s offset property
Creating a wave shape using the Shape protocol and Path function
Adding the wave’s animatableData property
Setting up the ContentView for animation
Duplicating and animating the wave shape in the ContentView
Adding an animated floating buoy to the ocean scene
Adding sound effects

--- Page 338 ---
Adding the wave’s offset property
Okay, let’s start by creating a new SwiftUI project – I’ll be calling it Making
Waves.
Then, let’s add a new file that will be in charge of making the waves for the
ocean. Press Command + N to create a new file, then select the
SwiftUIView file, and call it WaveView.
Inside this new file, we will make some minor modifications to the structure
so that it conforms to the Shape protocol, as we did in the previous project.
So, at the top of the WaveView struct, right after its name, remove the View
protocol and replace it with the Shape protocol. Also, remove the body
property as we don’t need that here. The file should look like this:
struct WaveView: Shape {
}
The reason why we removed the body property was that it was used to
return a view; however, we will be returning a path variable that will hold
the shape of the wave we want to animate.
The animation we want to create will be a wavy line that moves up and
down in a wave-like motion, on the y axis. We will need a variable to
control this animation movement, so let’s add a variable inside the
WaveView struct to handle this:
var yOffset: CGFloat = 0.0
It’s called yOffset because that’s what the variable will do: it will offset the
line only on the y axis. It gets an initial value of 0.0. Its type is set to
CGFloat.
We will need another special built-in Swift variable that will dynamically
change the value of the yOffset variable and make things animate, called

--- Page 339 ---
animatableData, but let’s first create the wave shape itself before adding
that.
Creating a wave shape using the
Shape protocol and   Path function
For the wave shape, it’s easy – we just need to make three straight lines and
one curved line and join them together. Think of it as a rectangle, with the
top line of the rectangle being the curvy wave part (skip to Figure 10.4 to
see what I mean).
Before we start adding the wave code, let’s first modify the Previews struct
so that we can see the results of each line of code we add. Modify the code
so it looks like the following:
struct WaveView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        Group {
        WaveView(yOffset: 0.7)
            .stroke(Color.blue, lineWidth: 3)
            .frame(height: 250)
        .padding()
            .previewDisplayName("Wave")
            
        }
    }
}
We start off by giving the yOffset parameter in the Previews struct a value
of 0.7. This is a simple hardcoded value that allows us to display our wave
shape in the previews on the right in Xcode. yOffset works by offsetting
two control points in the Bezier curve – one control point will be offset in
the up direction for the curvy line and the other control point will be offset
in the down direction on the curvy line. The next line of code adds a stroke
to the wave shape, so we can see it in the preview, and gives the wave a
height of 250 points.

--- Page 340 ---
Now, with these changes in the previews, any code we add to the WaveView
struct will immediately be visible in the previews. Let’s add the wave shape
code now, small pieces of code at a time, so we can better understand how
the wave shape is formed:
func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
        var path = Path()
        path.move(to: .zero)
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.minX, 
          y: rect.maxY))
        return path
    }
The first thing we do is create the path instance; this is the variable that
we’re going to load up with all the lines that make the wave shape.
The next line calls the move_to method. This is the method that starts the
drawing of the shape you’re making; in this project, that’s the wave shape.
The to parameter is asking where on the screen you want to add the first
point. For that parameter, we pass in the value of .zero, which is another
way of setting the x- and y-axis values to 0. (We could simply write out the
values as X: 0 and Y: 0, but using .zero is easier.)
The next line of code calls the addLine function, which simply draws a
straight line. Its parameters need an X and Y value to know where to put the
next point to draw the line. For those X and Y values, we pass in two helper
functions called minX and maxY, which automatically get different points of
the screen for us.
The iPhone uses the X and Y coordinate system – X runs from left to right,
and Y runs from top to bottom. The top-left corner of the iPhone screen
would have the X and Y values of 0, 0. As you move to the right of the
screen, the X value increases, and as you move down the screen, the Y
value increases. So, by using the minX function in the addLine parameter, it
will place a point at the far left of the screen (the minimum location on the
X-coordinate plane). We could hardcode a value instead, such as 50 or 100,
but by using the minX function, it tells Xcode to place the point over to the
far left of the screen. Though this may seem vague, it is helpful when
considering that Apple devices have different screen sizes.

--- Page 341 ---
Note
The following are the Swift helper functions available for use to place
points on the screen without hardcoding them: minX, midX, maxX, minY,
midY, and maxY. The midX and midY functions, as you might imagine, add a
point to the middle area of the screen, and maxX and maxY, when used
together, add a point to the bottom-right area of the screen.
Now, the result of that code is visible in the Previews window, showing a
vertical straight line:

--- Page 343 ---
Figure 10.1: The first line
The move_to and addLine functions have drawn a line down from the
middle-left area of the screen to the bottom-left area of the screen. The
length of the line is set by the frame modifier we used in the Previews
struct. By adding a bigger value in the frame modifier’s parameter, you
make the line bigger.
Now, with the first line of the wave shape done, let’s draw the second line –
this will be a horizontal line that starts from the bottom of the first line and
stretches to the right, across the screen. We can do this by adding the
highlighted line to our existing code:
func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
        var path = Path()
        path.move(to: .zero)
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.minX,
          y: rect.maxY))
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.maxX,
          y: rect.maxY))
        return path
    }
This line of code calls the addLine function again, adding a point to the
maxX and maxY locations. The result should now look like this:

--- Page 345 ---
Figure 10.2: The second line
With two lines and half of the wave shape done, let’s now add the third line,
which is the last straight one. Add the following highlighted line to your
existing code:
func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
        var path = Path()
        path.move(to: .zero)
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.minX,
          y: rect.maxY))
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.maxX,
          y: rect.maxY))
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.maxX,
          y: rect.minY))
        return path
    }
This line of code adds a point to the maxX (far-right) and minY (top-left)
parts of the screen, so the result will look like this:

--- Page 347 ---
Figure 10.3: The third line
Now that we have three straight lines, we just need to add the wavy line to
the top to complete the wave shape. Let’s add that now:
func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
        var path = Path()
        path.move(to: .zero)
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.minX,
          y: rect.maxY))
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.maxX,
          y: rect.maxY))
        path.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: rect.maxX,
          y: rect.minY))
        path.addCurve(to: CGPoint(x: rect.minX,
          y: rect.minY),
        control1: CGPoint(x: rect.maxX * 0.45, 
          y: rect.minY - (rect.maxY * yOffset)),
        control2: CGPoint(x: rect.maxX * 0.45,
          y: (rect.maxY * yOffset)))
        return path
    }
Here, we have used the addCurve function to create the Bezier curve. This
has three parameters.
The first parameter, to, is for adding a point to the screen for drawing the
curvy line. The previous line of code drew a line that ended at the top-right
side of the rectangle, so from there, the addCurve function will draw to the
minX and minY location, which is the top left of the rectangle, effectively
closing off the shape.
The next two parameters are what are called control points, or control1
and control2 points, specifically. These parameters are here to accept
values that will adjust the amount of curve in a line that pertains to the y
axis – control1 will adjust the right portion of the line and control2 will
adjust the left portion of the line.
To understand how these control points work, if we pass in a value of 0 to
both parameters, then the line created will be straight, not a curvy one;
that’s because a value of 0 does not alter those points up or down, thus the

--- Page 348 ---
line remains straight. But by passing in floating-point values, the control
points start to bend the line on the right and left sides by the given amount.
The control points do not act on the right and left ends of the line; those are
the connection points that close the wave shape. Instead, the control points
are equally spaced and offset from the ends.
Looking at the values being used for the control points now, they have been
computed to create a line that has a bend going upward on the right side and
a bend going downward on the left side. The x values for control1 and
control2 get their results by multiplying the maxX value by 0.45 (this is a
hardcoded value and helps shape the bend in the line on the x axis).
On the other hand, the y values for control1 and control2 are computed a
little differently. control1 gets its value by subtracting the minY value by
the result of multiplying maxX by the yOffset variable. control2 gets its
value by multiplying the maxY value by the yOffset value.
These computations may be a bit unclear at first, but when you complete
the project and experiment with different parameter values, you will see
how the math works to make the bend in the line move; the amount of
movement is related directly to how big or small a value the yOffset
variable has.
Let’s now have a look at the result of adding the control points:

--- Page 349 ---
Figure 10.4: The completed wave shape
Now, with all four lines completed, we have created the wave shape. Up
next, we will make the shape come alive using a special Swift property
called animatableData.
Note

--- Page 350 ---
When working with the path_in function, as we are doing here, there is
also another function that is used to close off the shape we are drawing out:
closeSubpath(). This is helpful when closing the ends of a shape without
needing to use the addLine() function and passing in X and Y points. We
didn’t need to use it here because we drew the wave shape out and ended
with the curvy line on top. If I drew the curvy line first and wanted to end
with a straight line, then I could have used this function to save some code.
Adding the wave’s animatableData
property
We now have a wave shape that we can duplicate as many times as needed
to create a layered ocean scene. However, those waves are still static,
meaning they won’t do anything unless we have a way of changing the
value in the yOffset variable. To accomplish that, we need to add one more
important variable to the file here: animatableData.
So, let’s add it right under the declaration of the yOffset variable:
var animatableData: CGFloat {
        get {
            return yOffset
        }
        set {
            yOffset = newValue
        }
    }
The animatableData property is an instance of a Swift class called
Animatable, and is a built-in Swift property that has a getter and a setter
attached to it. Properties with getters and setters do just that: they get a
value and set a value.
Using the animatableData property provides a few benefits over animating
with a simple @State property alone:

--- Page 351 ---
In our project, we’re using the animatableData property to get and set the
values of the wave’s control points. This getting and setting is happening
constantly and thus making the value of the yOffset variable change
constantly too. Since the yOffset variable is being used to create the curvy
line inside the path_in() function, the result will be that the curvy line
dynamically changes too.
With the animatableData property in place, and the wave shape completed,
we can proceed to the ContentView, where we will add the animation to the
shape.
Setting up the ContentView for
animation
Here, in the ContentView, we are ready to use the wave shape and add the
animation to it. Let’s start by creating a new struct at the bottom of the file,
just above the Previews struct, and call it WaveCreation:
struct WaveCreation: View {
    var body: some View { 
    }
}
It allows you to declaratively specify that a view can be animated,
making it clear to other developers (and to the framework) that the view
is intended to be animated
It allows the framework to automatically interpolate between the old
and new values, rather than requiring you to manually calculate the
intermediate values
It allows you to use the animation() method to specify how the
animation should be performed, such as the duration, curve, and delay
It allows you to use more advanced animation techniques, such as
animation(_:) and transition(_:), to specify the animation between
different states of the view

--- Page 352 ---
This struct is very similar to the ContentView struct – it conforms to the
View protocol, which means it must implement the body property. The body
property itself will return a view, and that will be the animated wave. By the
end of the next section, we will have created six waves in total, spaced out
neatly inside of a stack.
We will need several variables to get this working, some for the animation
and some that allow us to alter the size of the wave curve. Add the
following code above the body property, inside the WaveCreation struct:
@Binding var animateOffset: Bool
    var curveOne: CGFloat
    var curveTwo: CGFloat
    var radius: CGFloat
    var shadowX: CGFloat
    var shadowY: CGFloat
    var duration: Double
There are seven variables here:
The first one is a Binding variable, which we will use in ContentView
to start the animation when it is set to true.
The next two variables are called curveOne and curveTwo, which will
be used to set the size of the wave’s two curves. Remember the wavy
line shape has two curves on it, and they were created using those two
control points, one for the left curve of the wavy line and the other for
the right curve of the wavy line. The curveOne and curveTwo variables
will allow us to alter the size of those curves on that wavy line; a bigger
value will give us a bigger curve, and so a bigger wave.
Next is the radius variable, which allows us to set the radius on a
shadow. I want to give each wave a shadow later and so this variable
makes that customization easier.
The placement of these shadows is also important; we can control this
placement with two variables, shadowX and shadowY.
Finally, the duration variable allows us to set the duration of the
animation for each wave.

--- Page 353 ---
With those variables in place, we only need a few lines of code to complete
the WaveCreation struct. Those lines are as follows:
var body: some View {
    WaveView(yOffset: animateOffset ? curveOne : curveTwo)
        .fill(Color(UIColor.blue))
        .shadow(color: .gray, radius: radius, x: shadowX,
          y: shadowY)
        .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration:
          duration).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),
          value:animateOffset)
    }
The first line of code calls the WaveView struct, and that requires a value for
its yOffset parameter. We’re passing in one of two values: when the
animateOffset variable is true, we’re going to use the curveOne variable,
which means that one of the curves on the wavy line will be animated on
the y axis. But when the animateOffset variable is false, we will then use
the curveTwo variable, which will control the opposite side of the wavy line
on the y axis.
The next line of code uses the shadow modifier to add a shadow to the
wave. Looking at the parameters, the color parameter gets a gray color
(which will look good against the blue waves), the radius parameter sets
the size of the shadow, and the X and Y parameters allow us to adjust the
shadow up, down, left, and right.
Then, the final line adds the animation – this is an easeInOut timing curve,
which means the animation will start slowly, then build up, and when it
finishes, it will ease itself out slowly. The duration of the animation will be
set using the duration variable, with repeatForever and autoreverses set
to true. Then, for the value parameter, that gets the animateOffset
variable to start the animation.
Now, rather than just having one wave in our scene, we will call this
structure inside the ContentView six times to make the ocean.

--- Page 354 ---
Duplicating and animating the
wave shape in the ContentView
When creating our ocean, we’ll stack six waves in our scene and stagger the
animation values so that they animate at different times. Working in the
ContentView file now, we’ll start by adding a variable inside the
ContentView struct that will toggle the animation on:
@State private var animateOffset = false
Next, let’s add a ZStack that will hold all the waves, and inside that, let’s
set the background to a blue sky color:
 ZStack {
            //MARK: - BACKGROUND
            Color.blue
                 .opacity(0.5)
                 .edgesIgnoringSafeArea(.all)
        }
This code adds a blue color with an opacity of 0.5 (50%) for the
background, and then we stretch that background out all the way around the
edges of the screen using the edgesIgnoreSafeArea modifier.
We are now ready to add the first wave. So, add the following code directly
underneath the edgesIgnoring modifier, inside the ZStack:
//MARK: - WAVE 1
    WaveCreation(animateOffset: $animateOffset, curveOne:
      0.05, curveTwo: -0.05, radius: 50, shadowX: 0,
      shadowY: 50, duration: 5.0)
        .opacity(0.8)
        .offset(y: 575)
Adding the wave is simple because we have done all of the work already –
here, we just call the WaveCreation struct and fill some values into its
parameters.

--- Page 355 ---
The first value is for the animateOffset parameter, a Boolean that will start
the animation.
Then, the curveOne and curveTwo parameters require a value for both parts
of the wavy line we made in WaveView. When you increase the value for
one of the curve variables, you increase the height of the wave on one side.
If you increase the size of both curve variables, you increase the height for
both sides of the wave. Conversely, if you decrease the value for the curve
variables by using negative numbers, then the wave gets smaller.
I’m using a small value here of .05 and -.05. That’s because this is the first
wave in the scene, and it will be further out to sea, so I want this wave to be
a little calmer than the waves that are closer to the shore (and the user).
The next parameter is for the radius of the shadow. It’s set to 50, which
means it creates a shadow with a size of 50 points. The direction of the
shadow will be controlled by the shadowX and shadowY properties –
shadowX gets a value of 0 because I don’t want to move the shadow on the x
axis left or right, but I do want to adjust it on the y axis, and a value of 50
points for the shadowY variable will bring the shadow upward by 50 points.
Then, we have the duration for the animation. We're setting it to 5 seconds
to create the slower, calmer animation that we are aiming for with this first
wave.
Finally, We're setting the opacity of this wave to .8, so it’s slightly less
opaque than some of the other waves that we will be adding. Then, we
offset this wave using a value of 575 on the y axis, putting it toward the
bottom of the screen.
That completes our first wave. To see this animation, all we have to do is
toggle the animateOffset variable inside the onAppear modifier. Add this
code right at the end of the ZStack:
  .onAppear() {
            animateOffset.toggle()
        }

--- Page 356 ---
With that code in place, we can now run the app and see the result:
Figure 10.5: Our first wave
The first wave has a smooth animation flowing back and forth, and we’re
ready to build our next wave on top of it.
The code for the rest of the waves is nearly identical except for the specific
values that we have set in each parameter. Here is the code for the next five
waves:

--- Page 357 ---
//MARK: - WAVE 2
    WaveCreation(animateOffset: $animateOffset, 
      curveOne: -0.07, curveTwo: 0.07, radius: 100,
      shadowX: 0, shadowY: 10, duration: 4.0)
.offset(y: 610)
//MARK: - WAVE 3
    WaveCreation(animateOffset: $animateOffset, curveOne: 
0.1,       curveTwo: -0.1, radius: 30, shadowX: 0, shadowY: 
0,       duration: 3.7)
.offset(y: 645)
//MARK: - WAVE 4
    WaveCreation(animateOffset: $animateOffset, 
      curveOne: 0.14, curveTwo: -0.1, radius: 70, 
      shadowX: 0, shadowY: 10, duration: 3.5)
.offset(y: 705)
//MARK: - WAVE 5
    WaveCreation(animateOffset: $animateOffset, 
      curveOne: -0.05, curveTwo: 0.08, radius: 60, 
      shadowX: 0, shadowY: 20, duration: 3.2)
        .opacity(0.8)
.offset(y: 740)
//MARK: - WAVE 6
    WaveCreation(animateOffset: $animateOffset, 
      curveOne: -0.05, curveTwo: 0.08, radius: 60, 
      shadowX: 0, shadowY: 20, duration: 3.4)
.offset(y: 800)
As you can see, the values here are different from those of the first wave –
for example, wave 2 has larger values for the curve variables, and the radius
is bigger as well; however, the duration of this wave is slightly shorter, with
a value of 4 seconds, making the animation a little faster. Waves 3, 4, 5, and
6 also have shorter durations, so we are increasing the speed of the
animation for each wave as we move closer to the user’s point of view.
The shadows vary too, adding a nice white cresting look to the wave and
helping to delineate the waves from each other. I’m using a gray color for
the shadows as it’s not too pronounced; however, you can try white if you
prefer a brighter-looking wave.
Now, go ahead and run the project in the simulator again and check out all
the waves animating back and forth in our ocean scene:

--- Page 359 ---
Figure 10.6: All six waves together
As with the first wave, the animation is smooth and rhythmic, and by piling
up wave upon wave and offsetting each of them a little bit downward, we
have created an ocean scene.
Next, we’re going to continue adding animations to the scene by adding a
buoy that will bob up and down in the water, complete with a blinking light.
Adding an animated floating buoy
to the ocean scene
When adding the buoy to our ocean scene, we will be giving it four
different animations. It will do the following:
All of these animations will combine to create a realistic-looking bobbing
effect that simulates a floating object in an ocean reacting to the waves and
current.
First, download the buoy image, which you can find in the Chapter 10
folder in the GitHub repository, and add the image to the Assets catalog.
Then, create a new SwiftUI View file, which we will call BuoyView. Inside
the file, we will need six variables to get this buoy off the ground and into
the water, so add the following code to the BuoyView struct:
@Binding var tiltForwardBackward: Bool
    @Binding var upAndDown: Bool
    @Binding var leadingAnchorAnimate: Bool
    @State private var red = 1.0
Have a blinking light at the top of it
Tilt forward and backward
Move up and down
Rotate along its leading anchor

--- Page 360 ---
    @State private var green = 1.0
    @State private var blue = 1.0
Here, we are using three Boolean binding variables, which will oversee
their respective animations: tiltForwardBackward, upAndDown, and
leadingAnchorAnimate. Then, three State variables are used to make a
blinking light animation.
We just added some binding variables to the BuoyView struct, which will
introduce some errors in the project. The reason why these errors occur is
that anytime we add binding variables to the struct we are working in, we
will need to add them in the Preview struct as well; otherwise, the previews
will complain. The Preview struct’s job is to display all the code that’s
written within the file, so it works hand in hand with the BuoyView struct.
So, modify the Preview struct code to look like the following:
struct BuoyView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        BuoyView(tiltForwardBackward: .constant(true),
        upAndDown: .constant(true), leadingAnchorAnimate:
        .constant(true))
    }
}
We are now, once again, error-free.
Let’s now come into the body property and add a ZStack, then add the buoy
image inside of the ZStack:
 ZStack {
           Image("buoy")
        }
We should see the buoy in the previews now:

--- Page 361 ---
Figure 10.7: The buoy
We’re going to work on the blinking light first. In order to achieve this
effect, we have to add a rectangle shape, place it on top of the buoy (inside
the curved top), then give it some color, and finally toggle that color on and
off to make it look like the light is blinking.

--- Page 362 ---
Making the buoy light blink
To start the process of creating the light, let’s overlay a rectangle on the
buoy image. Add the following code to do that, right under the Image
initializer:
 ZStack {
           Image("buoy").overlay(Rectangle())
        }
This is the overlay modifier, which allows us to add a new view over an
existing view, to create layers of views.
If you look in your previews, you will see that the rectangle we just added
is much too big for what we need. So, there needs to be a little more
stylizing and resizing of it. But before we go any further, let’s set the color
variables to some initial values in the onAppear modifier so we can see our
work progressing in the previews. Add this code to the end of the ZStack:
.onAppear() {
            red = 0.5
            green = 0.5
            blue = 0.5
        }
I’m setting the red, green, and blue variables to a value of 0.5 (50%). This
equal combination of 50% for these RGB colors produces a gray or neutral
color, which will look good blinking against the blue sky background later.
Next, coming back to the Image initializer, let’s add that neutral gray color
to the rectangle using another overlay modifier and passing in the color
variables. Be careful to place the new code directly in front of the overlay’s
closing brace, like this:
 ZStack {
           Image("buoy").overlay(Rectangle()
                .overlay(Color(red: red,green: green,blue:

--- Page 363 ---
                  blue)))
        }
Now, we have a big gray rectangle, but we don’t see the buoy anymore
because the rectangle is too big and needs to be resized. We are going to fix
that. Add the following rectangle modifiers, which will size and position the
rectangle, and place them directly inside the closing brace of the first
overlay modifier:
 Image("buoy").overlay(Rectangle()
     .overlay(Color(red: red,green: green,blue: blue))
     //adds a corner radius only to the bottom corners of
       the rectangle
                .frame(width: 12, height: 17)
                .position(x: 112.5, y: 19.5))
                 }
The frame modifier sets the width and height of the rectangle to a small size
of 12 by 17. Then, the position modifier places the rectangle at the X and
Y coordinates of 112.5 and 19.5, which is at the top part of the buoy, the
area that represents the light.
You can see the rectangle in the following image:

--- Page 364 ---
Figure 10.8: The buoy with the rectangle overlay
The rectangle looks good; however, a rectangle is, well, a rectangle. It has
sharp corners on all four sides, whereas the top of the buoy has curved
corners, as you can see in Figure 10.9:

--- Page 365 ---
Figure 10.9: A closer look at the rectangle overlay
Using our current rectangle is a bit like fitting a square peg into a round
hole. Luckily, SwiftUI does give us a modifier that rounds the corner radius
of rectangles, but unluckily, there is still a problem with it: it rounds all four
corners when all we want is for the top two corners to be rounded.
We could fix this by adding an extension to the corner radius modifier and
altering its behavior so it will only act on two corners by writing numerous
lines of code. However, a simpler way of achieving a two-corner radius
modifier is by using the padding modifier in a unique way.
To do this, after the last variable in the BuoyView struct, add a constant to
store the radius we want for rounding the two corners of our rectangle:
    let cRadius = 8.0
I’m calling this constant cRadius, for the corner radius, and setting it to a
value of 8.0 points. The larger you make the corner radius value, the more
rounded the rectangle becomes; for our purposes, an eight-point value adds
just enough rounding to our rectangle’s two top corners to make it fit
perfectly within the buoy light.
Add the following code, directly after the second overlay modifier, like
this:

--- Page 366 ---
Image("buoy").overlay(Rectangle()
    .overlay(Color(red: red,green: green,blue: blue))
    ///add a corner radius only to the bottom corners
        .padding(.bottom, cRadius)
        .cornerRadius(cRadius)
        .padding(.bottom, -cRadius)
    .frame(width: 12, height: 17)
    .position(x: 112.5, y: 19.5))
Here’s what the code does. The .padding(.bottom, cRadius) line adds
eight-point padding to the bottom of the rectangle. Then, we call the
cornerRadius modifier, which will put a corner radius on all four corners
of the rectangle. But since we have an eight-point padding on the bottom of
the rectangle, we don’t see that corner radius placed on the bottom; we will
only see the curved corners at the top of the rectangle, which is exactly
what we want.
Finally, we call the padding modifier again, and again choose the .bottom
option to place padding only on the bottom of the rectangle. This time,
however, we set a value of -8 points. When we make this option negative, it
effectively extends the rectangle downward on the y axis – by 8 points – but
preserves those two sharp corners that we want at the bottom. This is a
pretty neat trick and saves us some time writing code in an extension for the
cornerRadius modifier. This is the result we see in the previews now:


--- Page 367 ---
Figure 10.10: The rectangle overlay now fitting the curved tip of the buoy
The previews show that our gray rectangle now matches the curvature of
the top portion of the light and has two sharp corners to match the bottom
portion of the light.
To finish off the light and make it blink, we only have to add one line of
code after the last line of code in the ZStack:
    ///the animation for the blinking light
    .animation(Animation.easeOut(duration:
      1).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),value: red)
With that code in place, if you run the previews here in the BuoyView file,
you’ll see that now we have a blinking light that will blink on and off for a
duration of 1 second, repeating forever, or until the app stops:

--- Page 368 ---
Figure 10.11: The completed buoy with a blinking light
Let’s add the animations that make the buoy move now.
Making the buoy move
The first animation that we will add to make the buoy move will be to rotate
the buoy along its leading anchor point. To do this, add the following code
right after the previous line of code in the ZStack:

--- Page 369 ---
   ///the animation for the anchor point motion
    .rotationEffect(.degrees(leadingAnchorAnimate ? 7 :
      -3), anchor: .leading) 
    .animation(Animation.easeOut(duration:
      0.9).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),
      value: leadingAnchorAnimate)
This code uses the rotationEffect modifier and will rotate the buoy by
either 7 degrees when the leadingAnchorAnimate property becomes true,
or -3 when it's false. For the anchor parameter, we used the leading
anchor option, which pivots the image around the leading edge, but you can
use the bottom option as well for a slightly different rotation.
Then, we added the animation modifier, setting its duration to 0.9
seconds, with repeatForever, and autoreverses set to true.
We will also toggle the leadingAnchorAnimate property to true in the
onAppear modifier shortly, but first, let’s add the other two animations to
the buoy.
The next animation to add will make the buoy tilt forward and backward.
Add the code for this right under the previous code:
   ///the animation for the tilt forward and backward
     motion
    .rotationEffect(.degrees(tiltForwardBackward ? -20 :
      15))
    .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration:
      1.0).delay(0.2).repeatForever(autoreverses:
      true),value: tiltForwardBackward)
The is almost identical to the previous code, but the value of
.rotationEffect is now set to tiltForwardBackward. The amount of
rotation or tilt forward and back is going to be either -20 degrees or 15
degrees, depending on the value inside of the tiltForwardBackward
variable. Also, in the animation modifier, we’re adding a slight delay of
0.2, as this will help to add to a real-looking bobbing motion.

--- Page 370 ---
Now, to add the final animation to the buoy, which will make the image
move up and down, add this line of code directly after the previous code:
.offset(y: upAndDown ? -10 : 10)
A negative value will move an image up the y axis and a positive value will
move the image down the y axis. So, this code will move the entire buoy
image 10 points up or down depending on the upAndDown variable.
The last bit of code we need in the BuoyView file is code that toggles on
these three animations in the onAppear modifier. So, add the following
code:
.onAppear() {
           leadingAnchorAnimate.toggle()
             tiltForwardBackward.toggle()
             upAndDown.toggle()
            red = 0.5
            green = 0.5
            blue = 0.5
        }
That completes the BuoyView file, and now we can proceed to ContentView
and add the buoy to the scene.
Adding the buoy to the scene
We want to place the buoy slightly in the distance of our ocean scene, so
let’s add it right after wave 1. Add the following code after the closing brace
of the first wave:
  //MARK: - BUOY
      BuoyView(tiltForwardBackward: $tiltForwardBackward,
        upAndDown: $upAndDown, leadingAnchorAnimate:
        $leadingAnchorAnimnate)
      .offset(y: 205)

--- Page 371 ---
Inside the BuoyView initializer, we pass in the three binding properties that
initiate three separate animations. We add a dollar sign before those binding
properties, which tells the compiler that there’s a two-way binding between
the BuoyView struct and the ContentView struct. Next, using the offset
modifier, we can place the buoy at the proper height in the ocean scene.
Now, go ahead and run the project in the simulator to see the animations:
Figure 10.12: The completed animation

--- Page 372 ---
Though the code for the waves and buoy work independently, the two
elements visually work together to create our ocean scene.
The final element that we can add next is some sound effects. How about
the sound of some ocean waves and a buoy bell ringing in the background?
That would really complete the project.
Adding sound effects
We already added sound in Chapter 4, when building the record player
project, and there’s nothing complicated about it.
First, start by creating a Swift file (just a Swift file, not a SwiftUI View
one), and call it PlaySound. Next, drag the M4A sound effects file called
buoyBells (which you can find on GitHub) and place it into the file
navigator.
Inside the PlaySound file, the first thing we need to do is import the
AVFoundation framework:
import AVFoundation
The AVFoundation framework gives us access to all the classes and
methods needed to add audio to a project.
Next, create an audioPlayer object to play our sound file:
var audioPlayer: AVAudioPlayer?
This audioPlayer object is optional, which you can tell by the question
mark at the end. It needs to be optional because the sound file may not exist
for whatever reason – maybe the file gets corrupted, or the sound file has
been downloaded from a server and the internet has timed out – and so this
protects the project from crashing.

--- Page 373 ---
Finally, under the previous line of code, all we need to do is add a function
to handle the audio needs of this project:
func playSound(name: String, type: String) {
    if let path = Bundle.main.path(forResource: sound,
      ofType: type) {
        do {
            audioPlayer = try AVAudioPlayer(contentsOf:
              URL(fileURLWithPath: path))
            audioPlayer?.play()
        } catch {
            print("Could not find and play the sound file")
        }
    }
}
The function is called playSound. It accepts two strings, one to hold the
name of the file and another to hold the file’s extension type.
The first thing we do is try to access the sound file that’s in the app bundle
by using the path_forResource() function. The app bundle is an internal
hidden folder that is created for each app to hold all the necessary files to
get the app up and running.
If the file exists with the specified name and type, then the code proceeds
into the do block and tries to create the audio player with the path of the
file’s location stored in the path constant. If, for whatever reason, the file
cannot be found or it’s corrupt, then the code will fall into the catch block
and print out an error.
And that’s really it for the PlaySound file. Let’s go back into ContentView
and add the sound effects to the project. In the onAppear modifier, set the
sound to start playing with the following code:
.onAppear() {
            animateOffset.toggle()
            playSound(name: "buoyBells", type: "m4a")
        }

--- Page 374 ---
We also need a way of stopping the sound too, when the app stops running
on the device or the user closes the app. The way to make the sound stop is
to call the onDisappear modifier, which we can use directly on the closing
brace of the onAppear modifier, like this:
       .onDisappear()
        {
            audioPlayer?.stop()
        }
And with that, the project is complete!
Summary
In this chapter, we created an ocean scene, with moving waves and a
bobbing buoy with a flashing light, and added some sounds too.
More specially, you used the Shape protocol, the path function, the
animatableData property, and curve variables to make the wave shape
come alive. When working on the buoy, we looked at how to combine
multiple types of animation to create unique effects, and how to turn
different colors on and off to create a blinking effect.
The parameters in this project are highly customizable, so feel free to
experiment further – maybe you want to create bigger waves or more of
them, create the waves in landscape orientation, alter the shadow to create a
horizon, or even replace the buoy with a boat!
Let’s keep going. In the next project, we will create a working elevator
animation using timers and sound effects.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 375 ---
Animating an Elevator
Welcome to the elevator project! In this one, we’re going to create a
working elevator, complete with sounds, floor lights, a button, and even
some images of people inside. We will control the elevator using timers that
are available from the Swift timer class, as we have done in previous
projects.
To bring these elements together, we’ll create a data model using the
@ObservableObject protocol. Apple recommends making a data model as
the place to store and process the data that the application uses. The data
model is also separate from the app’s user interface, where the views are
created. The reason to keep data and the UI separate is that this paradigm
fosters modularity and testability. It’s easier to find bugs in your logic when
the data is not mixed in with UI code. Once we have the data model set up,
we can then publish that data anywhere in the app using publishing
wrappers, as we will see later.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Setting up a project and adding a Binding variable
Assembling the elevator using images and the GeometryReader view
Putting people inside the elevator
Creating a data model and using the @ObservableObject protocol
Adding the data model functions
Adding the background, a button, and animating the doors
Adding floor indicator lights

--- Page 376 ---
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and finished project on GitHub:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-Applications.
Setting up the project and adding a
Binding variable
Okay, let’s get started! As always, we’ll create a new Xcode project (I’m
going to call mine Elevator).
Next, in the GitHub repo, take all the images from the Chapter 11 folder
and drop them into the Asset Catalog. These images include doorDrame,
leftDoor, rightDoor, inside, man, man2, man3, and man4.
Then, drop the audio files – doorsOpenClose and elevatorChime – into the
Project Navigator.
Next, we’re going to need a new file where we can assemble the elevator
and add the people, so create a new SwiftUI View file and call it
ElevatorAndPeopleView. We only need one variable in this file, which will
be the Binding variable. Let’s add it at the top, inside the
ElevatorAndPeopleView struct:
    @Binding var doorsOpened: Bool
This variable will control the elevator doors opening and closing.
Let’s update the Previews so that the code will build without errors. At the
bottom of the file, alter the Previews struct so that it looks like the
following:
struct ElevatorAndPeopleView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        ElevatorAndPeopleView(doorsOpened: 

--- Page 377 ---
          .constant(false), moveMouth: .constant(false))
    } 
The code adds a value of false to both binding properties, and the project
once again builds cleanly.
We can now move on to building out the elevator.
Assembling the elevator using
images and the GeometryReader
view
The next step is to use some of the images from the Assets catalog and
make an elevator.
We’ll start by adding the inside part of the elevator, which we’ll do by
adding the following code inside the body property:
 ZStack {
 GeometryReader { geo in
                }
        }
First, we have ZStack to hold all the views that will follow, and a
GeometryReader view.
The GeometryReader view is a container view that defines its content as a
function of its own size and coordinate space. It’s a little bit like the other
containers that we have used, such as VStack or HStack, but the difference
is that GeometryReader has more flexibility because of its proxy parameter,
the geo constant (which you can name whatever you want).
This proxy will contain information about the container’s size and
coordinate space, and we can pass that information to the child views inside
GeometryReader, which helps us precisely size and position its children

--- Page 378 ---
relative to the container. The GeometryReader view also makes the views
within it line up perfectly on all iPhone and iPad devices, whatever their
size.
We’re going to use GeometryReader to size and position all the parts of the
elevator, as well as the people inside.
Next, let’s add the code that creates the elevator’s interior within
GeometryReader’s body:
//MARK: - INSIDE ELEVATOR SCENE
    Image("inside").resizable()
      .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width,
      maxHeight: geo.size.height)
The Image initializer adds the image called inside to the scene, and then
uses the frame modifier to set the size of this image to the maximum width
and maximum height of the screen. It sets this size using the geo proxy
constant we created with the GeometryReader view.
The previews now display the inside of the elevator:

--- Page 380 ---
Figure 11.1: The inside of the elevator
Let’s continue assembling the elevator by adding doors next. The doors will
have animations attached to them so that they slide open and close, and then
later, we will add timers to them so that they can operate automatically after
an initial button press. So, continuing inside the GeometryReader view, add
this code for the doors:
  //MARK: - ADD THE DOORS
  HStack {
      Image("leftDoor").resizable()
          .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width)
          .offset(x: doorsOpened ? -geo.size.width / 2 : 4)
      Image("rightDoor").resizable()
          .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width)
          .offset(x: doorsOpened ? geo.size.width / 2 : -4)
              }
We put the doors in HStack because they need to be positioned side by side.
The doors are sized using the frame modifier and geo proxy constant, just
as we did with the inside elevator image. Both doors also get the offset
modifier tacked on to them, which will position them on opposite sides of
the screen, opening them up fully.
The process to open and close the doors is handled by the geo proxy
constant. When the doorsOpened property becomes true for the left door,
the geo proxy constant will move the door on the x-axis, to the left and off
the screen. The amount that the door moves is the width of the door divided
by 2. The reason why the left door moves to the left and not the right is that
we prefix the geo constant with a negative sign. When a negative value is
used and an object is being offset on the x-axis, that object will move to the
left, whereas a positive value will move the object to the right.
When the doorsOpened property becomes false, the offset modifier
reverses the animation and the left door closes.
For the right door, we do the same thing, except a positive value is used for
the geo constant, which moves the door to the right along the X axis to open
it. The values of 4 and -4 that are used for both doors are included to help

--- Page 381 ---
keep the two doors snug with each other when they are in the closed
position.
So far, this is what the scene looks like in the ElevatorAndPeopleView file:

--- Page 383 ---
Figure 11.2: The elevator doors
We have the elevator’s interior and doors placed together, and we have the
animation mechanism to operate the doors, but we won’t see any motion
happening until we call this file inside ContentView, and we still have some
more assembly to do.
Let’s put a frame around the outside of the elevator so that it will look like
the actual elevator, and provide a place to add the elevator’s button. Add the
following code just after the closing bracket of HStack, still within the
GeometryReader view:
      Image("doorFrame").resizable()
          .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width, maxHeight:
            geo.size.height)
Here, we are adding the doorFrame image to the scene, and as we want the
frame to go around the entire elevator, we used the same code that we used
for the inside image – we used the geo proxy constant again, and by
setting the image at the maximum width and height, the door frame creates
a nice border around the elevator doors. This is the result so far:

--- Page 385 ---
Figure 11.3: The elevator frame
Now, let’s add the animation code that will open and close the doors, and
control the speed and delay of the doors when activated later in the
ContentView. Its only one line of code, and it can be placed right after the
closing bracket of the GeometryReader view:
.animation(Animation.easeInOut.speed(0.09).delay(0.3),
  value: doorsOpened)
Here, we use the animation modifier. Then, we pass in a value of 0.09 for
the speed function, which will control how fast the doors open and close.
There’s also a slight delay added of 0.3 seconds, which will delay the door
opening and closing just enough to keep things in sync with the floor lights,
which we will add soon.
We’re getting close to finishing using this file – the only parts left to add are
the people images. Of course, you can put the people code into a separate
file if you prefer, but since there isn’t a lot of code in this file, it will be fine
to continue to work here.
Putting people inside the elevator
We’ll be adding four characters into our elevator, Let’s start with the manOne
image – add the following code right after the frame modifier near the top
of the file, inside the GeometryReader view:
  //MARK: - ADD THE PEOPLE
      Image("manOne")
        .resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width - 200, maxHeight:
          geo.size.height - 300)
        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 30, x: 5, y: 5)
        .offset(x: 0, y: 250)
What we are doing here is bringing the manOne image into the scene and
then adding the correct aspect ratio to the image. Next, we use the frame
modifier to set the size for the image, but what’s different this time is that

--- Page 386 ---
we use the proxy constant of GeometryReader to set the size dynamically;
when the width and height of an image are set this way, the scene will
proportionally scale up or down on all Apple devices to fit the various
screen sizes.
I’m trimming off 200 and 300 points for the width and height values so that
the image will fit nicely inside the elevator. Once we have the images sized
and positioned the way we want, they will scale dynamically when they
appear on different devices, so we do need to size and position them
initially.
We will then add some shadow with 30 points around the image on the X
and Y axes, which gives a nice depth of field for the man when placed
inside the shiny metal elevator. And finally, we offset the image on the Y
axis so that the feet are on the floor of the elevator.
This is how manOne looks in our elevator:

--- Page 388 ---
Figure 11.4: The first man
Since we don’t have the animation hooked up yet, to open the door and see
inside the elevator while we continue to work, you can simply comment out
the door code, and the door images will disappear.
The code for the three remaining people is similar to what we’ve just added,
so I’m going to add the other three images directly under the previous code:
      Image("manTwo")
        .resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width, maxHeight:
          geo.size.height - 290)
        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 30, x: 5, y: 5)
        .offset(x: 40, y: 230)
        .rotation3DEffect(Angle(degrees: 20), axis: (x: 0,
          y: -1, z: 0))
                
      Image("manThree")
        .resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width - 100, maxHeight:
          geo.size.height - 250)
        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 30, x: 5, y: 5)
        .offset(x: 130, y: 255)
                
      Image("manFour")
        .resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        .frame(maxWidth: geo.size.width - 0, maxHeight:
          geo.size.height - 280)
        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 30, x: 5, y: 5)
        .offset(x: -80, y: 265)
The code for the manTwo, manThree, and manFour images are largely the
same as the code for the manOne image, just with slightly different values
for the frame modifier, the offset modifier, and their positions in the
elevator.
Regarding the manTwo code, I’m adding a rotation effect to this image
because I want to turn this image a little bit toward the left, as he appears to
be talking, and it looks a little bit better if we position him in the direction
of the person on his right. This is accomplished with the rotation3DEffect

--- Page 389 ---
modifier; simply turning him 20 degrees on the Y axis is enough to point
him in the right direction of the other image.
Here is our elevator full of people:

--- Page 391 ---
Figure 11.5: The rest of the people
And that finishes off this file. We can now move on to creating the data
model file and adding the necessary functions for the timers and sound
effects.
Creating a data model and using
the ObservableObject protocol
Let’s create a new file – although this time, choose the Swift template file
rather than the SwiftUI View template – and call it DataModel. In this file,
we will put the data that we can access from ContentView later, using the
@ObservableObject protocol.
To use this protocol, we first need to import the SwiftUI framework:
import SwiftUI
Next, we need a class to hold all the data, and we also need to make the
class conform to the @ObservableObject protocol, so let’s add that now.
You can name the class anything you want, but many developers like to
name the class the same name as the file it is in, so we will do the same,
naming the class DataModel:
class DataModel: ObservableObject {
                                 }
Let’s understand what @ObservableObject does.
In previous projects, we used the @State property to pass data to the views
and display them to the user, but this is limited because the @State property
wrapper can only store values that control the states of a single view; we
can’t make @State properties and pass them around to other structs, as they
work in only one struct.

--- Page 392 ---
We also used the @Binding property wrapper, which helped to re-establish
the connection to other views or structs with a bidirectional link that the
@State property could not provide. However, this would not work globally
to hold and pass data to all files in the app.
So, what we need now is an object that can globally control all the app’s
data and its states and update the views accordingly when there are any
changes to the properties, either by user input or changes made by other
means, such as downloads from a server or the web.
This is where the @ObservableObject protocol comes in.
The @ObservableObject protocol defines three distinct property wrappers:
The advantage of using @ObservableObject over the @State property
wrapper is, again, that we can update more than one view with any changes,
and the state can be checked from views anywhere in the app.
Now, that’s a lot to take in, but it will become clearer as we build out the
data model. We already have the DataModel class created, and it conforms
to the @ObservableObject protocol – that’s the first step. Next, we want to
declare the properties we need, prefixing them with the @Published
property wrapper so that they will hold the various data and states and be
published to the views when needed. Let’s do that now by adding the
following properties inside the DataModel class:
    @Published var doorsOpened = false
    @Published var floor1 = false
    @Published var floor2 = false
    @Published var goingUp = false
An @StateObject property wrapper that listens for changes in
@ObservableObject and receives the new values
An @ObservedObject property wrapper that listens for changes in the
@StateObject property and receives those new values
An @Published property wrapper that reports all the changes to the
system and publishes those changes to the view app-wide

--- Page 393 ---
    @Published var doorOpenTimer: Timer? = nil
    @Published var chimesTimer: Timer? = nil
    @Published var doorSoundTimer: Timer? = nil
There are several properties here that hopefully are self-explanatory. The
four Booleans will be used to let us know when the doors of the elevator are
opened, whether floor 1 or floor 2 is the active floor, and whether the
elevator is going up or going down. The timers will control the timing of
the doors opening and closing, as well as when to play the floor chimes and
when to play the door opening and closing sounds.
With the properties listed, we next need a way to access them from other
parts of the app. This is done by going up the hierarchy to the Root view
and injecting an instance of the data model there – the Root view is the
entry point of the app, the point from which the app starts up.
Let’s go into the App.swift file in the Project navigator and create an
instance of the DataModel class there inside the struct, sending a reference
to ContentView, like this:
@main
struct Elevator: App {
    @StateObject private var appData = DataModel()
        var body: some Scene {
        WindowGroup {
            ContentView(appData: appData)
        }
    }
}
As I mentioned, this file is the entry point for our app, as denoted by the
@main wrapper at the top, and it creates the Root view window and takes
care of creating all the objects we need for the app to start up. Since this file
is at the top of the hierarchy, it’s the perfect place to create the DataModel
instance and pass it into the Root view, ContentView, so it can be available
app-wide.
The DataModel instance is called appData, and it gets prefixed with the
@StateObject property wrapper – this wrapper will listen for changes in

--- Page 394 ---
@ObservableObject and receive any new values.
Next, the @StateObject property wrapper that we called appData is
injected into ContentView by passing it into the ContentView initializer to,
again, make the data in the data model available throughout the app.
Now, to complete the connection from our data here, and from any view in
the project, all we have to do is include an @ObservedObject property
inside every view that we want to have a connection to this model. The job
of @ObservedObject is to listen for changes in the @StateObject property
and receive those new values so that it can update the views.
Let’s now go into ContentView and add an @ObservedObject property to
complete the bidirectional binding between the AppData class, which holds
all the data, and ContentView, which is in charge of displaying all of that
data on a screen to a user. Add the following property to the ContentView
struct:
struct ContentView: View {
    @ObservedObject var appData: DataModel
               •••••••
}
Now, we have an instance of DataModel, which will monitor all the data for
us; if there are any changes to the data, ObservedObject will know about it
and update the views accordingly.
Also, if we create more files and need to access the data model from those
new files, all we have to do is create another instance of the data model and
use it in those files too, like we did with the appData instance here, and they
will have the same access and be updated with any changes that occur.
We have the instance of the data model ready to be used in ContentView,
but now we need to add some functions that will take care of setting
different timers, which will trigger the doors to open and close, trigger the
floor number lights, and also trigger the sound effects at the right moments.

--- Page 395 ---
Adding the data model functions
In this section, we will create five functions, and each one oversees a
specific task:
Let’s start by creating the function that will open and close the doors.
Adding the doorOpenTimer function
Come back into the DataModel class, and directly underneath the last
variable, add the following function:
func openDoors() {
    doorOpenTimer = Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval:
      8, repeats: false) { _ in
        self.doorsOpened.toggle()
        }
    }
This function is called openDoors, and what this does is set the
doorsOpenTimer object to a value specified by the scheduledTimer
method. The scheduledTimer method will execute the code in its block
after a certain amount of time has elapsed – in this case, 8 seconds.
The scheduledTimerWithInterval function also has a repeats parameter,
which lets you repeat the triggering of the code in its body. In the code, we
A function to open and close the doors
A function to play the chimes bell sound that signifies the elevator has
reached its destination
A function to play the door opening and closing sounds
A function to light up the floor indicator lights
A function to stop all the timers

--- Page 396 ---
set the repeats parameter to false, as we only want the code in its body to
be triggered when the elevator button is pressed.
The code that it will trigger will involve toggling the doorsOpened property
to its opposite value. We’re going to add a button to the elevator, and we
will call this function when that button is pressed. When it’s pressed, if the
doorsOpened property is true, it will be toggled to false, and vice versa,
thus opening and closing the doors as needed.
Adding the playChimeSound function
Let’s create another function that will trigger the chimes sound effect; this
sound signifies the elevator has reached its destination and will play just
before the doors open. Add the following function, directly underneath the
previous one:
func playChimeSound() {
    chimesTimer = Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval:
      5.5, repeats: false) { _ in
       playSound(sound: "elevatorChime", type: "m4a")
      }
    }
This function is called playChimeSound, and it is like the previous function
we just added.
When the function is called, it sets the chimesTimer property to a value
specified by the scheduledTimer method, which is 5.5 seconds. After 5.5
seconds have elapsed, the scheduledTimer method will call the playSound
function within its body.
The playSound function has two parameters – one for the name of the
sound file that we imported into the project, and the other for the file’s
extension type. However, we haven’t created this function yet, so we will
get an error!
To fix this, we need to create a separate Swift file, which we will call
PlaySound. Then, add the following code to this file:

--- Page 397 ---
import Foundation
import AVFoundation
var audioPlayer: AVAudioPlayer?
func playSound(sound: String, type: String) {
    if let path = Bundle.main.path(forResource: sound,
      ofType: type) {
        do {
            audioPlayer = try AVAudioPlayer(contentsOf:
            URL(fileURLWithPath: path))
            audioPlayer?.play()
        } catch {
            print("ERROR: Could not find and play the sound
              file!")
        }
    }
}
As we’ve done in previous projects, we imported the AVFoundation
framework to have access to the audio classes and methods we need. Next,
we created an audio player instance and then added the playSound
function.
You should be familiar with how this function works; all we need to do is
call this function in any file in which we need to have sound playing,
passing the name of the sound file into its sound parameter and its extension
type into its type parameter. Now, the playChimeSound function should
play error-free.
Now, let’s head back to the DataModel class and continue to add the rest of
the functions that we need.
Adding the playDoorOpenCloseSound
function
When an elevator door opens and closes, it makes a distinctive sound,
similar to a mechanical whooshing sound. We want to add that sound to the
project, and we’ll need a function that can trigger it at the right moment.
Let’s do that right after the previous function:

--- Page 398 ---
func playDoorOpenCloseSound(interval: TimeInterval) {
        doorSoundTimer = 
Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval:           interval, 
repeats: false) { _ in
            playSound(sound: "doorsOpenClose", type: "m4a")
        }
    }
playDoorOpenCloseSound is a function in which we set the
doorSoundTimer property to a value specified by the scheduledTimer
method, and the value it will use for the interval parameter will be passed
into this function when it gets called in ContentView. When this function is
called, it triggers the code in its body after the interval time has passed, and
in its body is the playSound function, as we have seen before, which will
play the doors’ opening and closing sounds.
Adding the floorNumbers function
Up until this point, the functions that we’ve created have been simple and
straightforward, with only one or two lines of code each. But to have the
floor indicator lights working correctly, we need to add some more
complexity and a little bit of logic.
The objective of this next function is to have the appropriate floor light
activate when the elevator reaches its intended floor, and deactivate when
the elevator leaves that floor, as a real working elevator would do. So, let’s
add the following function underneath the previous one:
func floorNumbers() {
        ///light up floor 1 as soon as the button is
          pressed, making sure floor 2 is not lit first
        if !floor2 {
            floor1.toggle()
        }
        ///check if the doors are opened, if not, open the
          doors and play the chime sound
        if !doorsOpened {
            openDoors()
            playChimeSound()
            

--- Page 399 ---
        ///going up - wait 4 seconds and turn on the floor
          2 light, and turn off the floor 1 light
            if goingUp {
              withAnimation(Animation.default.delay(4.0)) {
                    floor2 = true
                    floor1 = false
                }
    ///once at the top, and the button is pressed again to 
      go down, wait five seconds then turn off the floor 2 
      light and turn on the floor 1 light
              withAnimation(Animation.default.delay(5.0)) {
                    floor1 = true
                    floor2 = false
                    playDoorOpenCloseSound(interval: 8.5)
                }
            } else if !goingUp {
              withAnimation(Animation.default.delay(5.0)) {
                    floor1 = true
                    floor2 = false
                    playDoorOpenCloseSound(interval: 8.5)
                }
              withAnimation(Animation.default.delay(5.0)) {
                    floor2 = true
                    floor1 = false
                }
            }
        }
    }
The function is called floorNumbers, and it starts off by checking various
properties to see whether they are true or false.
The first if statement in the function checks to see whether the floor2
property is false – if it is false, then we want to toggle the floor1
property to its opposite value. We always want to make sure that the floor1
and floor2 variables have values that are opposite each other, as they
represent the different floors that the elevator goes to.
After that first if statement, there is another if statement. This one checks
to see whether the doors are open; if they are not open, then the code will
open the doors and play the chimes sound.

--- Page 400 ---
Then, inside that if statement is another if statement, which makes this a
nested if statement. An if statement will not run the code in its body if the
variable it is checking is false; it will just move to the next line of code in
the file. This one is checking to see whether the goingUp property is true; if
it is true, let’s make floor2 true and floor1 false because we want to
light up floor2.
This code is all being triggered in the withAnimation function, after a delay
of 4 seconds. That’s the amount of time to wait before turning on the
floor2 light and turning off the floor1 light. The withAnimation function
is going to add a default animation, which is just a fade-in/fade-out
animation that looks good when turning on and off lights – in our case, the
elevator floor lights.
When the elevator reaches the top floor and the button is pressed again to
go down, the elevator waits 5 seconds, and then the floor1 light turns on
and the floor2 light turns off because the elevator is on its way down. Also,
we’re going to trigger the open and close door sounds after 8.5 seconds,
which is enough time for the elevator to reach the bottom floor, at which
point the sound needs to be playing. Again, we’re doing this in the body of
the withAnimation function, so it adds a default fade animation to the lights
being turned on and off.
Next, we need to use similar code for when the goingUp variable is not
true, so both states, true and false, will operate the lights and sounds
correctly. We do that in an else if statement. else if offers another
alternative to the if statement that proceeds it, should that if statement be
false. So here, else if checks whether goingUp is false; if so, the code
turns the floor1 light on after 5 seconds because the elevator is heading
down, turns the floor2 light off, and then plays the door opening and
closing sounds. Otherwise, after 5 seconds, it will do the opposite, turning
floor2 back on and floor1 off.
This is the logic now in place that is used to operate the timers and trigger
the appropriate sounds at the right moment, by using if and else if
statements. Now, the thing with timers is that when a few of them are
created, they can overlap with each other and cause unintended
consequences in the app, so we need to stop them before creating new ones.

--- Page 401 ---
Adding the stopTimer function
We do have a lot of timers firing at various times in the app, and some of
these timers can overlap with each other in the background and cause
unintended side effects in the app. We need to stop any timer that has served
its purpose so that there are no problems. New ones will be created when
needed, but they all should be stopped after the completion of their tasks.
So, let’s handle the deactivation of all the timers in a separate function. Add
the following final function to the file:
 func stopTimer() {
        doorOpenTimer?.invalidate()
        doorOpenTimer = nil
        chimesTimer?.invalidate()
        chimesTimer = nil
        doorSoundTimer?.invalidate()
        doorSoundTimer = nil
    }
This function is called stopTimer, and it invalidates all the timers that were
created and sets them to nil.
Invalidating a timer effectively stops the timer from ever firing again and
requests its removal from its run loop. Setting an object to nil is equivalent
to a variable being set to zero; it makes sure that it is completely stopped.
We will call this method inside the elevator button press and make it the
first method to be called, thus removing any timers that might still be going.
Now, DataModel is complete with all the functions and properties set up to
be used anywhere in the app; we’re going to use them in ContentView.
Let’s head over there and start to put things together so that we can start to
see some results.
Adding the background, a button,

--- Page 402 ---
and animating the doors
Let’s continue and start to fill out ContentView so that we can see the
elevator, and then we can animate things.
First, we will add a black background to the whole scene. To do this, add a
constant at the top just after the appData variable to hold some color:
let backgroundColor = Color(UIColor.black)
Next, inside the body property, let’s add ZStack and call our
backgroundColor constant, setting the color for the screen:
var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            backgroundColor.edgesIgnoringSafeArea(.all)
               }
Now, we will need to call the ElevatorAndPeople view so that we can
make it visible in this file. Add the following code, still working inside
ZStack, and in fact, all subsequent code we add into this file will be within
this ZStack:
          //MARK: - ADD THE PEOPLEANDELEVATOR VIEW
            ElevatorAndPeopleView(doorsOpened: 
              $appData.doorsOpened)
As we’ve seen before, to show another view in ContentView, we simply
call it here inside the body property and pass in the binding variable that we
created to access the model class. Remember that we use the dollar sign to
access binding variables, which tells the system that we are bidirectionally
connecting to another view.
Note that we can access our data by using the appData observed object, and
by typing a dot, we can then choose any of the properties or functions
within the model file. Here, I’m choosing the doorsOpened property, and
we will be toggling that on in a button.

--- Page 403 ---
And speaking of buttons, let’s add the elevator button right now; we’ll put it
on the left side of the elevator frame, and when pressed, the doors will open
and close. Add the following code under the previous line:
//MARK: - ELEVATOR BUTTON
    GeometryReader { geo in
      Button(action: {
           appData.doorsOpened.toggle()
        }) {
           ///if the doors are opened, make the button 
             white, otherwise make it black
            Circle().frame(width: 10, height: 10)
              .foregroundColor(appData.doorsOpened ? .white 
              : .black)
                .overlay(Circle().stroke(Color.red,
                  lineWidth: 1))
                .padding(5)
                .background(Color.black)
                .cornerRadius(30)
        }.position(x: (geo.size.width / 33), y:
          (geo.size.height / 2))
This code starts off by using GeometryReader. As we have seen, using
GeometryReader will align the views so that they fit perfectly in the scene,
and they will resize correctly on other size devices by accessing the geo
constant inside the closure.
We then create a button inside GeometryReader – the button will run all the
code in its body when pressed. We want to check out how the doors work
first, so I added the code to toggle the doorsOpened property when the
button is pressed.
Let’s look at what else we’re doing here with the button code by looking at
the button closure, where the styling is being done. The code uses the
Circle view to create a circle shape for the button. I gave it a dimension of
10 x 10 and then added several modifiers to help with the styling:
First, we use the foregroundColor modifier for the circle, which is
either going to be white when the doors are open, or black when they
are closed. This is achieved by accessing our model’s ObservedObject

--- Page 404 ---
And with that, the button is complete. Let’s try out the animation that we
have so far:
instance, appData, and calling up the doorsOpened property from the
model.
The next modifier is overlay, where we pass in another Circle view.
Then, by adding the stroke modifier, it turns it into a stroked circle
(and not a filled circle). The color of the stroke is set to red and has a
line width of 1 point. This stroke will look like a small red ring within
the button, as you sometimes see in an actual elevator button.
Then, we use the padding modifier, with a value of 5 points.
Then, we use a background color modifier, positioned underneath the
red ring.
Finally, a cornerRadius value of 30 is added to the black background
color view, as that is by default a rectangle and we need a rounded
shape.
Now, all we have to do is position the button exactly where it needs to
be on the elevator frame, and we can do that with the position
modifier, passing in the geo proxy constant, which has the precise size
of an iPhone’s screen. Here, the code locates the button on the X axis by
using the width of the button, and divides the GeometryReader (the
width of the iPhone screen) by 33; this value will move the button
exactly to the left portion of the elevator frame. Now that we have the X
location for the button, we need the Y location. Using the geo constant
again, and dividing height by 2, we can place the button in the middle
of the frame for the Y axis.

--- Page 405 ---
Figure 11.6: The opening doors and button
Press the button and you should see the doors open; if you press the button
again, the doors will close. And the doors work perfectly, opening and
closing at a nice pace, and the button changes color when the doors are
open.
Let’s continue and add floor indicator lights to the elevator.

--- Page 406 ---
Adding floor indicator lights
As we know, elevators have lights, usually at the top of the frame, to let
people know what floor the elevator is on at any time. Let’s simulate that by
adding the lights that represent both floors of the elevator, one and two. Add
the following code directly after the previous line of code we have just
written:
//MARK: - ADD THE FLOOR LIGHTS
  HStack {
      Image(systemName: "1.circle")
          .foregroundColor(appData.floor1 ? .red : .black)
          .opacity(appData.floor1 ? 1 : 0.3)
      Image(systemName: "2.circle")
          .foregroundColor(appData.floor2 ? .red : .black)
          .opacity(appData.floor2 ? 1 : 0.3)
  }.position(x: (geo.size.width / 2), y: (geo.size.height *
    0.02) + 2)
      .font(.system(size: 25))
We start off with HStack so that we can put two circle images side by side.
These are system images, and they have specific names of 1.circle and
2.circle. The first circle represents the first floor, and the second circle
represents the second floor.
The color of the first circle light will depend on the floor1 variable – if it’s
true, it will make the color red; otherwise, if it’s false, it will turn it black.
The opacity of this circle will also depend on the floor1 variable – again, if
true, the circle will have a fully opaque look; otherwise, we will make the
opacity .3. We use the same code for both circles.
Then, by putting the position modifier at the end of HStack, we can
position both circles directly at the top of the frame and keep the position in
place by, again, using the geo proxy. Finally, we will use a font size of 25
for the floor numbers.
That completes the floor indicator lights.

--- Page 407 ---
Finally, all we need to do is to call the rest of our functions inside the button
body, so that when the button is pressed, all the lights and sounds will work
on timers. So, add the following code to complete the project:
 //MARK: - ELEVATOR BUTTON
    GeometryReader { geo in
        Button(action: {
             appData.stopTimer()
            appData.playDoorOpenCloseSound(interval: 0.5)
              appData.doorsOpened.toggle()
            appData.goingUp.toggle()
              appData.floorNumbers()
        }) {
The code accesses the model functions using the appData instance and runs
each one when the button is pressed.
Now, run the project and you’ll see that when the button is pressed, the
doors will open and you’ll see the people inside. Also, notice that the button
changes color and the indicator for the floor lights up, along with chimes
and the sounds of doors opening. When the elevator is moving between
floors, the doors, lights, and sounds will work on their own, at the right
times.

--- Page 408 ---
Figure 11.7: The completed project
It’s a nice animation, and it really simulates the timing of an actual elevator
very well.
Summary
We have now completed our elevator project. Let’s look at what we have
done.
We used GeometryReader and the proxy constant to add images to the
project and position them where needed, which will resize all the images in
the project dynamically, based on the device that displays them, whether
iPhones or iPads.
We created DataModel to store all the app’s data and functions, and we
accessed all that data using the @ObservableObject protocol.

--- Page 409 ---
We used timers to trigger door and light animations at different moments in
the scene, making the animations happen on their own. We also added and
styled a button to change color, when pressed, and we made floor lights turn
on and off with timers.
The skills learned here can be useful and applied to other projects. For
example, if you were putting together a game app that has several levels,
maybe you could incorporate an elevator scene into the game to take the
user to another level after they have completed a certain skill, or to search
for power-ups.
How about a challenge? To take the project further, see whether you can
add more floors to the scene. Or how about animating the people inside the
elevator using the same techniques we used with the girl on the swing
project? Cut up the images and make different parts move in different ways
– for example, you could cut up the second man’s mouth so it looks like
he’s talking when the doors open. You could also animate the legs so that
they shuffle a little bit inside the elevator, or animate their bodies so that
they sway a little, basically simulating human motion.
In the next chapter, we’ll start putting together a language-learning game
and animate various aspects of the UI to make the game fluid and
interesting. We’ll also make the game work across three different languages
– English, Spanish, and Italian – so that it can appeal to a broad range of
language learners.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 410 ---
Creating a Word Game (Part 1)
In this project, we will start creating a “complete the word” game, which we
will then finish in the next chapter. The word game will require the user to
find words using the letters within a given word. To add a little twist to the
game, we’ll offer it in three different languages – English, Spanish, and
Italian.
Some new things that you will learn are how to add and customize a
PickerView, implement user feedback in a few different ways (including
with pop-up alerts, haptics, and sound), and add various animations to the
user interface, including spring animations.
So, in this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and finished project from the Chapter 12
and 13 folder on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-
Setting up the project and creating a data model
Building out the UI by adding a text field and list
Displaying a character count next to each word in the list
Checking the entered words for duplicates
Adding a random word with a button press
Checking whether the user’s entered word is possible
Checking whether the user’s entered word is a real word
Checking whether the user’s entered work is valid
Creating HeaderView with an info button
Creating PickerView

--- Page 411 ---
SwiftUI-Applications.
Setting up the project and creating
a data model
First, create a new Xcode project and call it Find Words. Then, in the
GitHub repository, go to the Chapter 12 and Chapter 13 folders; this
folder will include three subfolders called Language Data, Images, and
Sound. Add the Images folder to the Assets catalog, and the other folders to
the Project navigator.
Next, we will create a data model file to hold the data for the
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-Applications app –
to do this, press Command + N, choose the SwiftUI file type, and call it
DataModel. In this file, import SwiftUI by adding the following code at the
top of the file:
import SwiftUI
As we have done before, we add a class to hold all of the properties and
methods. We’ll call the class DataModel, and it needs to conform to the
ObservableObject protocol in order for us to access this data later on.
Then, we’ll add the properties we need:
class DataModel: ObservableObject {
    @Published var allWordsInFile = [String]()
    @Published var baseWord = ""
    @Published var userEnteredWord = ""
    @Published var userEnteredWordsArray = [String]()
    @Published var letterCount = ""
    @Published var showSettings: Bool = false
    
    //error properties
    @Published var errorMessageIsShown = false
    @Published var errorTitle = ""
    @Published var errorDescription = ""
    
    //properties to stpre in user defaults

--- Page 412 ---
    @AppStorage ("selectedSegment") var selectedSegment:
      Int = 0
    @AppStorage ("englishIsOn") var englishIsOn: Bool = 
      false
    @AppStorage ("spanishIsOn") var spanishIsOn: Bool = 
      false
    @AppStorage ("italianIsOn") var italianIsOn: Bool = 
      false
   
    //splash view property
    @Published var change = false  
}
Let’s break down the code:
First, we have an array called allWordsInFile, which will hold all of
the words needed to play the game. We will use three separate files, one
for English, one for Spanish, and one for Italian. This array will be
loaded with whichever language is selected to play the game with.
Next is a baseWord property, which will contain the word the user is
working with and trying to find new words from.
Then, we have another property called userEnteredWord that will hold
the user’s word when they type it into the text field.
Next is another array called userEnteredWordsArray, which will hold
all of the user’s guessed words so that we can keep track of what they
have completed so far.
Next is a property called letterCount, which will be used to keep
track of the number of letters per word being used so that we can tally
an average number of letters per word. For example, if the user is only
choosing three-letter words, we will display that word letter average on
the screen.
Next is the Boolean that will open SettingsView, allowing the user to
change the game’s language.
Next are three error properties we will use to show an alert when the
user misspells words or enters duplicate words, which are words that are
already in the list.

--- Page 413 ---
Let’s continue and add all the methods we need for the project now into
DataModel, right under the properties we just added:
 //FUNCTIONS
     //starts the game off with a random word by looking in 
       the app's bundle for the language file
    func getRandomWord() {
        guard let wordsURL = Bundle.main.url(forResource: 
        setWordLengthAndLanguage(), withExtension: "txt"),
        let wordsConverted = try? String(contentsOf:
          wordsURL) else {
        assert(false, "There was a problem loading the data
          file from the bundle.")
            return
        }
        let allWordsInFile = 
          wordsConverted.components(separatedBy: "\n")
        baseWord = allWordsInFile.randomElement() ?? 
          "SwiftUI"
    }
    //sets the language for the game
    func setWordLengthAndLanguage() -> String {
      return ""
    }
    
    //adds a new word to the game
    func addWordToList() {
        
    }
    
    //check to see if the word is a duplicate
    func isWordDuplicate(word: String) -> Bool {
        return false
    }
Next are what are called AppStorage properties. These are used to save
the user’s language settings in memory, so when they close the app and
then come back later, their settings are preserved. When we prefix a
property with the AppStorage wrapper, a place in memory on the phone
will preserve the user settings.
Next, a property to display a splash screen. A splash screen is an
opening scene that the user will see briefly as the app loads in the
background.

--- Page 414 ---
    
    //check to see if the word is possible given the base
      word's letters
    func isWordFoundInBaseWord(userGuessWord: String) ->
      Bool {
        return false
    }
    
    //check to see if the word is a real word in dictionary
    func isWordReal(word: String) -> Bool {
        return false
    }
    //error message
    func displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: String,
      description: String) {
        
    }
Let’s break this code down too:
As you see from the code, I have filled out only one function for now, and
the rest of the functions are just known as function stubs. A function stub is
a declared function but without anything in its body other than a return
We have a method to grab a random word from the language files
We have a function to set the word length – either 7, 8, or 9 letters –
and language – either English, Spanish, or Italian
There’s a function to add the user’s word to a list so that they can see
all the words that they have found so far
Then a function to check whether their word is a duplicate; we don’t
want duplicates in the list
Then, a function to check to see whether the word is possible given the
word they’re working with
We also have a function to check to see whether the word is a real
word in the language of choice (we don’t want made-up words!)
And then finally, a function to display an error message to the user if
they type in a word that doesn’t exist or cannot be made

--- Page 415 ---
statement. This is helpful because we can still continue writing code in the
interface, call these functions stubs, and the code will still build cleanly,
even though it won’t do anything yet.
We will fill out the body of the other functions soon enough, but let’s look
at the one function I did add code into – getRandomWord(). This function
starts by trying to access the app bundle, which is where we placed our
language files. When we add files to the project, they are put into the app
bundle. The app bundle is a folder where all the app files are stored and
used to make the app work. We need to access the bundle and find the path
to those language files so we can load the words they contain and use them
in the game.
To access them, Swift gives us a method called url(forResource) for
locating the path of a file – we simply type the name of the file into the first
parameter and the extension into the second parameter. For now, we’re just
going to load up the seven-letter word file in the English language (but later
on, we’ll be accessing words of other sizes and other languages’ files).
For the extension, I put in txt for a text file. If we find that file, then we
proceed to the next step where we attempt to convert that file into a string
so that we can manipulate it. If the code is able to complete that task, then it
will separate the words in the file using the components(separatedBy)
method and pass in the new line character, so each word will be on its own
line. This is helpful so we can access these words later, one by one.
Next, we need to get a random word from the file and store it in the
baseWord property. Notice that we need to use the ternary operator here.
That’s because the randomElement function is an optional function. For this
reason, it might not have a word to get, so, we offer an alternative word to
keep the code from crashing in case there are no words in the file (this
would only happen if the file became corrupt, which is rare).
Finally, if we do come across a problem along the way, we’ll use the assert
function. assert takes two arguments: a condition to check, and a message
to display if the condition is false. If the condition is false, the message
will be displayed and the app will halt in a debugging environment. In a
production environment, the assert statement will be ignored.

--- Page 416 ---
We will use the getRandomWord() function later to get a random word that
the user can play with and try to find new words from.
Okay, that’s all the properties and functions in place, with one function
complete.
Now let’s go into the App.Swift file and create an instance of the
DataModel class, and then inject that instance into ContentView so that the
data model is available from anywhere in the app:
@main
struct FindWordsApp: App {
    @StateObject private var appData = DataModel()
    
    var body: some Scene {
        WindowGroup {
            ContentView(appData: DataModel())
        }
    }
}
This should be familiar to you – we have created the DataModel instance
and passed it into the root view, ContentView. We will also get an error
because we now need to update ContentView, and the Previews. Let’s add
the following modifications in ContentView and finish off implementing
the Observable object protocol by adding a DataModel instance so that we
can pass the data into the views:
@ObservedObject var appData: DataModel
Now let's update the Previews at the bottom of the file 
  too:
ContentView(appData: DataModel())
Then, let’s add a property to display a random word at the top of
ContentView:
@State var wordToPlayFrom = "Click for Word"

--- Page 417 ---
The wordToPlayFrom property will be set to a random word, which will be
the user’s word to start playing with and finding new words to make with.
It’s being set to a string that will prompt the user to start the game.
Okay, our data model is now set up here in ContentView; let’s focus on
building out the user interface next.
Building out the UI by adding a
text field and list
To build out our UI, first, we’ll add a text field view so the user can enter
their answers, and then we’ll add a list view, so all of the user’s words can
be listed in a table.
To do that, go into the body property of ContentView and remove the
existing boilerplate code for the Text and Image views, and add the
following code:
//MARK: - TEXTFIELD - LIST TABLE
    VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 15) {
       //MARK: - TEXT FIELD AND LIST
            TextField("Enter your word", text: 
              $appData.userEnteredWord)
                .textInputAutocapitalization(.never)
             .textFieldStyle(RoundedBorderTextFieldStyle())
                .padding(.horizontal, 55)
                .onSubmit(appData.addWordToList)
         ///List view to display the user input
         List(appData.userEnteredWordsArray, id: \.self) {
           word in
                Text(word)
            .foregroundColor(.black)
            .font(.system(size: 18))
        }
        .frame(width: 285, height: 190, alignment: .center)
        .cornerRadius(10)
        .foregroundColor(Color.blue)
        .font(.system(size: 50))
    }

--- Page 418 ---
Here, we added a text field so we can grab the user’s input, while changing
.textInputAutocapitalization to never so that auto-capitalize won’t
capitalize what the user types into the text field. The word files we imported
into the project are all written in lowercase, so turning auto-capitalization
off helps with accessing those words and checking the letters.
Next, the text field gets a little styling and a little padding, before we call
the onSubmit modifier and pass the addWordToList property into it. What
this modifier does is add an action to be performed when the user types in a
word and hits Enter. That action being performed is a call to the
addWordToList method that we have in our data model. That method will
process the user’s input and see whether their word is allowed to be used
based on certain criteria, such as whether the word is even possible in the
chosen language and whether they make it from the letters present in the
base word.
Notice that in order to access our data model, we have to use our DataModel
instance’s appData that we created at the top of this file; this gives us access
to all the methods and properties we created in DataModel.
Continuing with the code, we then move on to the List view, which creates
a list to display the user’s words. This uses the id parameter to uniquely
identify each word in the guessedWords array. When we iterate (loop)
through userEnteredWordsArray, we need a way of identifying its content
– each element in that array has to be unique to be able to use it and
fortunately, every word is indeed unique (no two words are the same). So,
what the id parameter you see here is saying is that it will use the word’s
own name as its identifier (the self part), and we can access the elements
in the array.
After that, we did a bit more styling. We set the text color of the words to
black and their size to 18 points. Then, we set the frame size of the List
view, as well as changing the color to blue and providing a cornerRadius
property.
Now, if we run the app, we can type words into the text field, but when we
press Enter, the word isn’t being placed into the List view:

--- Page 420 ---
Figure 12.1: Words typed into the text field
The reason the words are not going into the list is that we just haven’t filled
out the empty addWordToList function in the DataModel class yet. Let’s fill
out that method now with some code that will allow the user’s typed-in
word to be displayed inside the list:
func addWordToList() {
    let usersWord = userEnteredWord.trimmingCharacters(in:
      .whitespacesAndNewlines).lowercased()
    //guard against one or two letter words - they are too 
      easy
    guard usersWord.count > 1 else {
        return
    }
    userEnteredWordsArray.insert(usersWord, at: 0)
    userEnteredWord = ""
  }
Here, we created a userWord constant, which is going to store the new word
that the user adds to the list. We first check the user’s word for white
spaces. This way, if the user types some extra spaces in the text field by
mistake, the trimmingCharacters function will eliminate them. Next, the
word is made lowercase using the lowercased function.
Then, we use the guard statement, which is very similar to the if statement,
which checks to see whether the word that the user entered has more than
one letter. If it does, it will proceed to the next line of code. Otherwise, the
method will return right there and not run any more code. When the code
“returns” from a method, that means the code is finished running that
method, and even if there’s more code inside that method, it won’t run. The
reason why we’re checking to see whether there need to be at least two
letters in the user’s word is because those are too easy. Even though there
aren’t many one-letter words in any given language, why not simply
remove them altogether?
After the user’s word has been trimmed and made lowercase, it’s then
added to userEnteredWordsArray, and inserted at index zero using the
insert(at) method. This index is at the beginning of the array, and the

--- Page 421 ---
reason why we insert the word at the beginning and don’t append it to the
end of the array is that we want each new word to appear at the top of the
list so that it’s readily visible.
Finally, we set the newWord property back to an empty string, which
effectively clears out the Text view when the user presses Enter, so they
can type in another word when ready.
Now, if we run the project, we can see that when we type words into the
text field and press Enter, they now appear in the list:

--- Page 423 ---
Figure 12.2: Words are now entered into the list
New words will appear at the top of the list. The List view, by default, is
also scrollable, so the user can easily scroll up and down to see previously
entered words.
Let’s continue with the UI and display the number of characters each word
contains.
Displaying a character count next
to each word in the list
I also want to add a number next to each word that indicates how many
letters are in the word that the user has entered. Later, we will take this
number from each word and add them together to get an average of how the
user is doing in terms of the length of words they are entering.
We can put this number inside a circle, and luckily this is very easy, as
Swift gives us system images of circles with numbers in them that are
already created; all we have to do is call them up. So, back in ContentView,
then inside the List view, let’s put the Text view inside of an HStack (so
they are side by side), and add an Image view for the number circle:
List(guessedWordsArray, id: \.self) { word in
        HStack {
            Image(systemName: 
              "\(word.count).circle")
            Text(word)
        } .foregroundColor(.black)
          .font(.system(size: 18))
    }
The Image view gets a system image of a circle. The word.count code
statement gets the number of letters in the user’s word and displays that
number inside of a circle. Now if we run the code, all the words that are
typed in will have their letter counts displayed in a circle to the left of the
given words:

--- Page 425 ---
Figure 12.3: The letter count displayed in a circle
Let’s move on to now checking the user’s words for duplicates.
Checking the entered words for
duplicates
Now that we’re displaying the words that the user enters, how about we
check them to make sure they are real words in a dictionary and that there
are no duplicate words in the list? We have all the function stubs in place
for these checks, so let’s start filling them out.
The first function we’ll fill out is isWordDuplicate, which we’ll modify to
look like this:
 func isWordDuplicate(word: String) -> Bool {
    return userEnteredWordsArray.filter { $0 == word 
      }.isEmpty
  }
What this does is to check userEnteredWordsArray to see whether it
contains the word the user has typed into the Text field. Here’s how it
works. The return statement in this function uses the filter method on
the userEnteredWordsArray array. The filter method takes a closure as
its argument, which is evaluated for each element of the array. In this case,
the closure checks whether the current element of the array ($0) is equal to
the word passed as an argument to the function.
The result of this filter operation is a new array that contains all the
elements of userEnteredWordsArray that match the given condition. If this
new array is not empty, that means that the word already exists in the
userEnteredWordsArray, so the function returns false. If the new array is
empty, that means that the word is not duplicated, so the function returns
true. The isEmpty property of the array is used to check whether the array
is empty.

--- Page 426 ---
Now, just filling out the function is not enough to have it check for
duplicates; we have to call this function inside of the addWordToList
function so that we can use it to check the new words before they are added
to the list. Let’s do that now – inside the addWordToList function, add the
following, right after the userWord instance is created:
func addWordToList() {
    let usersWord = 
      userEnteredWord.lowercased().trimmingCharacters(in: 
      .whitespacesAndNewlines)
    //is the word a duplicate
   if !isWordDuplicate(word: usersWord) {
    displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: "You already used 
      this word", description: "Keep looking!")
    return
        }
            •••••••••
}
This code checks the isWordDuplicate function to see whether it’s
returning true by using the ! operator in front of it. Remember, the
isWordDuplicate function returns a Boolean value, either true or false,
so if this function returns false, then the if statement runs the code in its
body, which is another function called displayErrorMessage. This will
display an error message to the user telling them that their word is a
duplicate (we haven’t set up our error messaging system yet, but we will
soon!).
Now I’d like you to come back into ContentView and run the app, enter a
word, and see it appear in the list. Then, try entering that same word again,
and you’ll notice you’re not able to. The guard statement stops it from
happening because it checks and sees that the word has already been
entered into the list.
Next, we want to add a button that will grab a random word from the word
files we imported into the project, which gives the user a word to play with
and try to find words from.

--- Page 427 ---
Adding a random word with a
button press
Before we continue with the methods and fill them out, we need a button to
provide a random word that the user can play off and try to find words
from. After all, it’s not a challenge to just type random words and for them
to appear in the list currently.
We’ll start by supplying a file of thousands of seven-letter words, from
which one will be shown on the screen randomly when a button is pressed.
We will also give the user the choice to choose a seven-, eight-, or nine-
letter word, and the option to select another language later, but right now,
let’s just stick with seven-letter English words.
If you haven’t done so already, go to the GitHub folder, select the Language
files folder, and drop the contents of that folder into the Project navigator.
Once done, select them all, right-click, and choose New Group From
Selection. Then, name the group Languages – this helps keep everything
organized in the Project navigator.
Now those files are added to the project and we have already built out the
getRandomWord function, which will get us a random word from a specified
file, so now we need to call this function so that we can show the word to
the user – we can do that with a button. Add the following code directly in
VStack, above the Text field code:
 //MARK: - BUTTON
        Button(action: {
            appData.getRandomWord()
            wordToPlayFrom = appData.baseWord
        }){
            ZStack {
                Image("background").resizable()
                    .renderingMode(.original)
                    .frame(width: 125, height: 50)
                    .cornerRadius(15)
                Text("New Word")
                    .foregroundColor(.white)

--- Page 428 ---
             }
        }.padding(7)
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 2, x: 1, y: 1)
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 2, x: -1, y: -1)
        
        Text(wordToPlayFrom)
This code creates a button. Inside the action parameter for the button, we
use our appData instance and call the getRandomWord function. We also set
the wordToPlayFrom property to the baseWord value because baseWord
contains the random word that will appear on the screen.
Now every time the button is pressed, a randomized word from our text file
is placed into baseWord, which then gets placed into the wordToPlayFrom
property to be displayed.
At the end of the button code, we create a Text view that displays
wordToPlayFrom on the screen. The button is then styled with a wood
background image, a slight corner radius, a little bit of shadow, and the
words New Word.
After adding that code, the button should look like this:

--- Page 430 ---
Figure 12.4: A button to create a random word
Now, press the button, and you will get a random word that a user can work
with. Also, notice that when you press the button, it actually looks like it’s
being pressed down; we get this behavior by default, which really adds to
the user experience.
The game is coming along, but we want to continue checking the word the
user enters to see whether it can be made from the randomized word. Let’s
do that up next.
Checking if the user’s entered word
is possible
Looking for duplicate words is not enough. Now that we have generated a
random seven-letter word, we want to make sure that the user’s entered
word can be made from the letters that are in the random word. For
example, if the random word is bookend and the user types in books, that
would be invalid because s is not in the random word.
Let’s go back to the DataModel class and add code to the
isWordFoundInBaseWord function so that we can check that the word can
be made from baseWord:
  //check to see if the word is possible given the baseWord 
    letters
   func isWordFoundInBaseWord(userGuessWord: String) -> 
     Bool {
        var comparisonWord = baseWord
        return userGuessWord.allSatisfy { letter in
            guard let position = 
              comparisonWord.firstIndex(of: letter) else {
                return false
            }
            comparisonWord.remove(at: position)
            return true
        }
    }

--- Page 431 ---
Here’s how this function works. The isWordFoundInBaseWord function
takes a String parameter, userGuessWord, and returns a Bool value
indicating whether or not userGuessWord can be made by removing letters
from the baseWord string.
The function starts by creating a comparisonWord variable equal to
baseWord. The comparisonWord variable is used to keep track of the
remaining letters in baseWord that haven’t been matched by
userGuessWord.
Next, the function uses the allSatisfy method of String to check that all
the letters in userGuessWord can be found in comparisonWord. The
allSatisfy method iterates over each character in the string and returns
true if the closure passed to it returns true for all characters.
The closure takes a single parameter letter, representing the current letter in
userGuessWord being processed. It first uses the firstIndex(of:) method
to find the index of a letter in comparisonWord. If a letter is not found in
comparisonWord, the closure immediately returns false, which will make
the overall allSatisfy call return false.
If a letter is found in comparisonWord, the closure removes that letter from
comparisonWord using the remove(at:) method. Finally, the closure
returns true.
If the allSatisfy call returns true, the function returns true, indicating that
userGuessWord can be made by removing letters from baseWord. If
allSatisfy returns false, the function returns false.
The logic for this can be a little tricky to understand at first, but it basically
looks at each letter in the user’s word and compares it to baseWord. Any
letter that’s not in baseWord will cause the method to return false, meaning
the user’s word is incorrect.
Now that we have this method written out, let’s put it to work. We need to
call this method in the addWordToList function, so place this code after the
if statement’s closing brace:

--- Page 432 ---
func addWordToList() {
        let usersWord = 
          userEnteredWord.trimmingCharacters(in: 
          .whitespacesAndNewlines).lowercased()
        //is the word a duplicate
        if !isWordDuplicate(word: usersWord) {
        displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: "You already used
          this word", description: "Keep looking!")
        return
        }
        //is the word possible given your base word letters 
          to work with?
        guard isWordFoundInBaseWord(userGuessWord:
          usersWord) else {
            displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: "This word is
            not possible", description: "Create only words
            from the letters in the given word")
            return
        }
            userEnteredWordsArray.insert(usersWord, at: 0)
            userEnteredWord = ""        
        }
What we’re doing here is calling the isWordFoundInBaseWord function, and
it will have userGuessedWord passed into it. The function checks whether
the word is possible to create – if not, we’re going to display an alert
message to the user using the displayErrorMessage method (again, the
alert messages will be created later).
Let’s try this out. Come back into ContentView and run the program. You
will see that you cannot enter a word unless those letters are also present in
baseWord:

--- Page 434 ---
Figure 12.5: Checking whether the word is possible using the base word’s
letters
Here, I entered set into the list because that can be made from settler, but I
could not enter sent because there is no n in settler. So, we can see that the
isWordFoundInBaseWord function is working perfectly.
Checking whether the user’s
entered word is a real word
There is one final check we need to do, and that is to see whether the word
is an actual word in the dictionary. This check is important because the user
could rearrange letters in baseWord, make up their own word, and enter it
into the list. We want to prevent that and check each of the words against an
actual dictionary. To do that, we can use the UITextChecker class. This
class has methods and properties we can use to check whether a word is an
actual word in the dictionary, and what’s especially nice is it will work with
misspellings and authenticity in Spanish and Italian as well.
So, let’s go into the DataModel class and add the following code to the
isWordInDictionary function:
 func isWordInDictionary(word: String) -> Bool {
    return UITextChecker().rangeOfMisspelledWord(in: word,
      range: NSRange(location: 0, length:
      word.utf16.count), startingAt: 0, wrap: false,
      language: "en").isNotFound
    }
We’re going to get an error here because I am adding this isNotFound
property. So, let’s fix that error first, and then we can go over what the code
is doing. Outside the class’s closing brace, add the following extension:
extension NSRange {
    var isNotFound: Bool {
        return location == NSNotFound

--- Page 435 ---
    }
}
Going back now, the isWordInDictionary function checks whether a given
word exists in the English dictionary. It does so by creating an instance of
UITextChecker and calling the rangeOfMisspelledWord method on it. This
method takes several arguments:
The method then returns an NSRange that indicates the range of the first
misspelled word found. If no misspelled word is found, the location
property of the returned range is set to NSNotFound.
The isNotFound computed property is an extension on NSRange that returns
true if the location property is equal to NSNotFound, and false otherwise.
This makes it more readable and allows us to write isNotFound instead of
comparing the location of NSNotFound in the function.
Summing it up, the function creates an instance of the UITextChecker class.
UITextChecker looks through its dictionary for any misspelling to make
sure the word is real – if it is in the dictionary, true is returned and the
word will be entered into the user’s list; otherwise, false will be returned,
and we show a message to the user saying that this is not an actual word in
the dictionary.
Now that the function is complete, let’s use it. Add the following code
directly after the closing brace of the previous guard statement in the
word: The word to check for spelling
range: The range of the word to check, specified as NSRange
startingAt: The starting position of the word to check within the
specified range
wrap: A Boolean value indicating whether to wrap around the end of
the range to the beginning when checking for misspelled words
language: The language to use for spell checking – in this case, "en"
for English

--- Page 436 ---
addWordToList function:
 //is the word spelled correctly and a real word in the
   chosen language? - only real words allowed
    guard isWordInDictionary(word: usersWord) else {
        displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: "This is not a 
          valid word", description: "Use only real words")
        return
    }
With that code in place, give the app another go and make up your own
word using the given letters in baseWord:

--- Page 438 ---
Figure 12.6: Checking whether the word is in the dictionary
Here, I made up a word using the letters from baseWord – tesh – however, I
wasn’t allowed to add the word to the list because there is no such word in
the English language, so we know the function is working.
And that really completes all of the word-checking functionality for the
app; we will add pop-up alerts for when a user’s word doesn’t pass any of
those checks.
Let’s focus on building out the UI some more. We’re going to add a text
string at the top that will be the name of the app, and we can style this in a
separate file.
Creating HeaderView with an info
button
Let’s continue building out the UI and add a header title, which will be the
name of our app. We can create this header in a separate file so we can keep
our ContentView clutter free.
The purpose of HeaderView is twofold – to set the title of the app, and to
add an info button that opens a user settings page.
Press Command + N, choose a SwiftUI View file, and call it HeaderView.
Then, add a Binding property in the HeaderView struct:
@Binding var showSettings: Bool
Now let's update the Previews struct to satisfy Xcode and so 
we can build cleanly again:
HeaderView(showSettings: .constant(false))
        .previewLayout(.fixed(width: 375, height: 80))
Next, add the following code inside the body property:
   ZStack {
          Image("title").resizable()

--- Page 439 ---
              .frame(width: 250, height: 50)
              .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
          
          //info button
          Button(action: {
          }){
              Image(systemName: "info.circle")
                  .font(.system(size: 30, weight: .medium))
                  .padding(.top, 10)
                  .accentColor(Color.black)
          }.offset(x: 160)
      }
First, we added a ZStack to hold two views, an image displaying the title of
the app, and a button that we will set up to take the user to a settings page,
where they can choose another language to play the game in. Also added
was the shadow modifier on the image to help make it stand out a little
more.
Inside the button closure, we use the system image of an info circle, then
some top padding on it to align the button vertically with the image, and
then we colored the button black using the accent modifier. After that, we
offset the button to the right 150 points so that it’s next to the image on the
right side of the screen.
When the info button is pressed, a settings page will open, giving the user
three language options for the game. The showSettings property will be
used to open up SettingsView, but we don’t have SettingsView yet, so
let’s make one. Press Command + N, choose SwiftUI View, and name it
SettingsView. And just like that, we now have our SettingsView. Let’s
come back into the HeaderView and add the code that we need to open up
the SettingsView.
Inside the button, we need to toggle the showSettings state variable, so add
the following line of code to the button body:
showSettings.toggle()
And finally, in order to open up a sheet over another view, we need to call
the sheet modifier on the button, so add the code to the end of the button’s

--- Page 440 ---
closing brace:
 Button(action: {
              self.showSettings.toggle()
          }){
              Image(systemName: "info.circle")
                  .font(.system(size: 30, weight: .medium))
                  .padding(.top, 10)
                  .padding(.horizontal, 10)
                  .accentColor(Color.black)
          }.offset(x: 160)
           .sheet(isPresented: $showSettings) {
              //show the settings view
              SettingsView()
          }
The sheet modifier is used in SwiftUI to open a sheet, which is simply
another view that opens by sliding up from the bottom of the screen. The
sheet is triggered by the isPresented parameter – when the value of
isPresented becomes true, the code in the sheet modifier’s body will run.
In the sheet modifier’s closure, there is a call to SettingsView; this is the
view (sheet) that gets presented over ContentView. To dismiss the sheet, the
user slides it back down with their finger.
To see this in action, we need to add two more lines of code inside
ContentView. First, go into that file, and add a State property that can
connect to the Binding variable of HeaderView. Add this State variable
right after the previous property at the top in ContentView:
@State var showSettings: Bool = false
I’m calling it showSettings, the same as the variable it’s binding to from
HeaderView.
Now, we just need to add a call to HeaderView to get the info button
working. Add this line of code inside VStack at the top:
HeaderView(showSettings: $showSettings)

--- Page 441 ---
And that’s all we need to get SettingsView working. Try it out – press the
information button in ContentView and SettingsView opens:
Figure 12.7: SettingsView
To dismiss the view, simply slide down on the opened view. This “sliding to
close” behavior is automatically baked into the sheet modifier, so we don’t
have to implement it.
So, we have SettingView working, although it doesn’t do much right now
other than open up and show Hello, World! (we will build that out soon

--- Page 442 ---
enough). Let’s continue with the styling of the interface and add a
PickerView that the user can press on to set the size of the words they want
to play with.
Creating PickerView
A PickerView is a view that displays various options to the user. The picker
can either be a single button with a drop-down list, a segmented list with
multiple buttons, or a wheel that the user can spin to select an option.
There are two main differences between these three pickers in terms of
style. The first is how they appear in your app. The second is the number of
options available to the user – the wheel can hold many, many options for
the user, whereas a button picker or a segmented control picker is limited by
the amount of space on the screen.
Since we will be offering just three options to the user, a seven-, eight-, or
nine-letter word option, we’ll go with the segmented control.
Adding PickerView
Let’s start by adding a new SwiftUI View file and calling it PickerView.
Next, let’s add an instance of the DataModel class at the top of the struct so
we have access to the data properties:
@ObservedObject var appData = DataModel()
Then add a VStack, and inside that, add a topBar image that we have in the
Assets catalog, which will help to frame the picker:
VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 10) {
          //bar
          Image("topBar").resizable()
              .frame(width: 280, height: 8)
              .padding(.bottom, 10)
              .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
}

--- Page 443 ---
In the code, we add the topBar image and put a little padding and shadow
around it to help it stand out against the background (which will be added
soon). Then, we use 10 points of center spacing on the VStack to keep some
space between the views.
Now, add the Picker control underneath the last line of code we just added:
Picker("", selection: $appData.selectedSegment) {
              Text("7 Letter").tag(1)
              Text("8 Letter").tag(2)
              Text("9 Letter").tag(3)
              
          }
This code adds the picker and uses the selectedSegment property in
DataModel, which is used to keep track of which segment of the picker has
been selected by the user. The picker is set to three different titles, and we
use the tag modifier to distinguish which title goes where on the picker
control. Now, the user can choose between 7, 8, or 9 letters for the word
they will work with.
This is the default button look, which offers options to the user when
pressed:

--- Page 445 ---
Figure 12.8: The button picker
Let’s now look at how we can style the picker to something more suitable
for our game.
Styling PickerView
As I mentioned, I feel that segmented control looks better, so let’s change
the styling to that picker option instead. Add the following code after the
closing brace of PickerView:
      .pickerStyle(SegmentedPickerStyle())
      .background(RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 8)
      .stroke(Color.black, lineWidth: 4).shadow(color: 
        Color.black, radius: 8, x: 0, y: 0))
      .cornerRadius(8)
      .padding(.horizontal, 50.0)
      .padding(.bottom, 10)
We set the picker to the segmented style, and added a rounded rectangle
with a corner radius of 8 points, with a black stroke around the picker
control to give it a nice border. Then, we finished it off with some shadow
and padding, and this is what it looks like:

--- Page 447 ---
Figure 12.9: The completed PickerView
PickerView is done, but to complete the work in the PickerView file, let’s
add a bottomBar image to the scene. After the shadow modifier, add the
following:
Image("bottomBar").resizable()
        .frame(width: 280, height: 8)
        .padding(.bottom, 10)
        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
This just sets bottomBar like topBar, and helps frame out PickerView in
the UI:

--- Page 449 ---
Figure 12.10: The bottom bar image added
Let’s go back into ContentView, where we need to call PickerView to bring
it into the scene. Add the following just below the HeaderView code:
          //MARK: - PICKER
        PickerView()
And now we have our PickerView that can offer the user some choices. It
doesn’t do anything yet because we need to fill out the
setWordLengthAndLanguage method, so let’s do that. Back in DataModel,
add the following code inside the setWordLengthAndLanguage method:
    //sets the word length and language for the game
    func setWordLengthAndLanguage() -> String {
        let language = ["English": "En", "Spanish": "ES",
          "Italian": "It"]
        let wordLength = [1: "7", 2: "8", 3: "9"]
        var dataFile = ""
        var selectedLanguage = ""
        if englishIsOn == true {
            selectedLanguage = "English"
        } else if spanishIsOn == true {
            selectedLanguage = "Spanish"
        } else if italianIsOn == true {
            selectedLanguage = "Italian"
        }
        if let languageCode = language[selectedLanguage],
          let lengthCode = wordLength[selectedSegment] {
        dataFile = 
          "\(lengthCode)LetterWords\(languageCode)"
          letterCount = "   \(lengthCode) letter word – 
            \(selectedLanguage)   "
        }
        return dataFile
    }
This is how the setWordLengthAndLanguage function works. It starts by
defining two dictionaries, language and wordLength:

--- Page 450 ---
Next, the function checks the value of the selectedSegment variable. This
variable holds an integer that represents the user’s selected word length
(seven letters, eight letters, or nine letters).
Based on the value of selectedSegment, the function retrieves the
corresponding word length from the wordLength dictionary using the
square bracket notation, wordLength[selectedSegment]. This gives us the
word length as a string, such as 7, 8, or 9.
The function then checks the values of the englishIsOn, spanishIsOn, and
italianIsOn variables. These variables hold Booleans that indicate whether
the user has selected the corresponding language.
If one of these language variables is true, then the function uses the
corresponding language abbreviation (retrieved from the language
dictionary) and the word length (retrieved from the wordLength dictionary)
to construct the filename of the data file that contains the words for that
language and word length. For example, if the user has selected English
with seven letters, the filename will be 7LetterWordsEn.
The function sets the value of the letterCount variable to a string that
provides a description of the selected language and word length, such as 7
letter word - American English.
Finally, the function returns the constructed filename as a string.
There’s one other bit of code we need to add to ContentView in order to get
the language word count string working for the picker control. Add the
following code directly after the shadow modifier of the button:
The language dictionary maps the names of different languages to
their abbreviations. In this case, "English" is mapped to "En",
"Spanish" is mapped to "ES", and "Italian" is mapped to "It".
The wordLength dictionary maps integer values to their corresponding
word lengths. For example, 1 is mapped to "7", 2 is mapped to "8", and
3 is mapped to "9".

--- Page 451 ---
//MARK: - WORD TO PLAY FROM
      VStack {
          //word letter count string
          Text("\(appData.letterCount)")
              .font(.system(size: 18, weight: .regular, 
                design: .serif))
              .foregroundColor(Color.white)
              .bold()
              .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
              
      }
In this code, we added a VStack and then displayed the letterCount
property in a Text view by using the appData instance. Then, we applied a
font size and weight and a white foreground, made it bold, and added a
shadow to the Text view. What I want you to do now is to cut out the Text
view that displays the wordToPlayFrom property, and paste it inside the
VStack just added, at the very end. This keeps both text views horizontally
organized.
Now, to test the picker out and see it display the letter word string, as well
as a word in a different language, we need to come to our data file and set
one of the language variables to true; just for testing purposes, we will
later toggle these variables in the settings page. So, in DataModel, change
the spanishIsOn variable to true, like this:
@AppStorage ("spanishIsOn") var spanishIsOn: Bool = true
Now, come into ContentView and select the length of the word that you
want to use from the picker control. Press the button and you will see a
Spanish word of the length you chose and the letterCount string
displaying the chosen language’s flag and picker selection for the word size:

--- Page 453 ---
Figure 12.11: Choosing the word size and language for the game
You can check it for the other two languages as well by just setting one of
those languages to true and keeping the others set to false. Also, if you
don’t set one of the AppStorage variables to true, then the picker will not
pick the length of the word; it will default to an eight-letter word (this
behavior will work itself out when we finish adding the rest of the code in
the next chapter).
After you’re done testing things out, make sure to set the data variable back
to false.
Summary
So, we’ve come to the end of this chapter, and have done quite a bit of
work.
We started building out our game, allowing the user to enter words to play
the game, and adding checks to validate their choices. We also added a
button that the user can press to bring up a random word from a file of
thousands of words, a button that brings up a settings page, a picker control,
and a letter count string.
Next, we will continue building out the app, specifically building out the
user interface, the settings page so it contains those three buttons that the
user can select for the languages, and adding error messages when the
user’s entered word is not valid. So, let’s continue with the second part of
this project in the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 454 ---
Creating a Word Game (Part 2)
In the first part of our project, we put together a good portion of the
interface and implemented much of the game’s functionality, so we
currently have a working game that can list all the user’s entered words.
Let’s continue here in the second part of the project, finishing off the
settings screen so that the user can select the language of their choice, and
adding more elements to the UI to help make it more polished – for
example, adding user feedback.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Technical requirements
You can download the resources and finished project from the Chapter 13
folder on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
Creating a settings screen
Now that we can set the word length, let’s put together the settings view so
that the user can click on the info button and actually change the language
from there. We want to create three buttons – one for each language – and a
Creating a settings screen
Styling the UI
Implementing user feedback with alerts
Adding a Footer View to display more information
Adding haptics and button sounds

--- Page 455 ---
fourth button, the Done button, which users can use to complete their
selection and dismiss the page.
So, inside SettingsView, we’ll first need a variable to access DataModel.
Add this observed object variable at the top of the SettingsView struct:
 @ObservedObject var appData = DataModel()
Next, let’s add a title for this page called Language Settings in the body
property:
 VStack {
        Text("Language Settings")
            .font(.title).bold()
            .padding(.top, 20)
        }
Here, we simply add the Text view with a little padding and bold font, all
inside of VStack.
Next, let’s add a Form view and a Section header view inside VStack to
group the buttons that we will be adding. Place this code just under the
padding modifier:
        Form {
            Section(header: Text("Select a language")) {
            }
        }
The Form view is a container that’s commonly used to group controls
together, and the Section header will add some header text to each
grouping. This is what SettingsView looks like so far:

--- Page 457 ---
Figure 13.1: Styling the SettingsView using the Form and Section header
views
Next, we will add buttons to let the user select a language.
Adding the language buttons
The buttons we will create will be styled with a wood image background
and some text applied to them. Let’s do the button styling in a separate
struct.
Add the following struct anywhere in the file, as long as it’s not inside the
SettingsView struct (I usually create other structs just above the Previews
struct):
//style the button with a background and text
struct configureButton: View {
  var buttonText = ""
  var body: some View {
      ZStack {
          Image("background").resizable()
              .frame(width: 70, height: 35)
              .cornerRadius(10)
          Text(buttonText)
              .foregroundColor(.white)
              .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
      }
  }
}
We’re calling the configureButton struct, and inside it, we create a string
variable that will hold the text for the button. Then, we’re using the
background image in the Assets Catalog and setting its size and
cornerRadius value. After that, we add a Text view with white color and
shadow, all done inside of ZStack so that they overlay each other.
Let’s proceed to add the first button, which will let the user play the game
in the English language. Add the following code inside the Section header
braces:

--- Page 458 ---
var body: some View {
    VStack {
        Text("Language Settings")
            .font(.title).bold()
            .padding(.top, 20)
        Form {
            Section(header: Text("Select a language")) {
        VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 10) {
            HStack {
                //english button
                Button(action: {
                   
                }){
                    configureButton(buttonText: "English")
                }
                Spacer()
                
                //english flag
                Image("engFlag").resizable()
                    .border(Color.black, width: 1.5)
                    .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
            }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
In this code block, we added VStack with a center alignment and a spacing
of 10 points. This will keep each button vertically spaced from each other
by 10 points.
Along with creating a button to select the English language, I want to add a
flag for the chosen country’s language as well. We do this in HStack – the
button will be on the left, and the flag will be on the right of the screen.
Next, I call the configureButton struct in the button closure, which will set
the button to the word English and give it the wood background image. For
the flag, I added a small border around it with a 1.5-point width, so it has a
nice defined edge, and since this is associated with the English button, we
will use the American flag image.
Now you can try it out; press the English button and see what happens.
Note that the whole row will flash with each button press, which is not

--- Page 459 ---
exactly the behavior we’re going for. This happens because we made a
custom button that does not have the same behavior as a default button.
Instead, it would be nice just to have the button flash on its own, and not the
row. We can achieve this by using the ButtonStyle protocol to control what
flashes when the button is pressed.
Let’s do that. Add the following code underneath the configureButton
struct:
struct ButtonFlash: ButtonStyle {
    func makeBody(configuration: Configuration) -> some 
View {
    configuration.label
        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 2, x: 2, y: 2)
        .opacity(configuration.isPressed ? 0.3 : 1)
  }
}
This struct is called ButtonFlash, and it uses the ButtonStyle protocol.
This is a protocol that applies interactive behavior and custom appearance
to buttons. The ButtonStyle protocol requires that we use the makeBody
method to configure the behavior and look for the button label.
In the code, we’re only calling two modifiers in the makeBody function –
shadow and opacity. The opacity modifier will check the isPressed
property to see whether it’s true. If it is true, that means the button has
been pressed, so we can change the opacity to .3, which will make the
button fade out slightly. Otherwise, if the button is not pressed, the button
will remain at full opacity.
All we need to do next is call the buttonFlash structure on the button, like
this:
      HStack {
                //english button
                Button(action: {
                   
                }){
                    configureButton(buttonText: "English")
                }.buttonStyle(ButtonFlash())

--- Page 460 ---
                Spacer()
                 
                //english flag
                Image("engFlag").resizable()
                    .border(Color.black, width: 1.5)
                    .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
            }
The buttonStyle protocol automatically creates a new modifier for us, also
using buttonStyle, which we can access like any other modifier by using
dot syntax and then passing in the name of our new struct, ButtonFlash.
Now, the button has a new look. It has a shadow around its text that gives it
a sort of 3D look:

--- Page 462 ---
Figure 13.2: The English language button
When you press the button, the modifiers will help make it look like it’s
actually being pushed down. Also, it will just look like the button is being
pushed, rather than the whole row.
Now, with the configuring and styling of the button complete, let’s add two
more buttons for the other languages. Add this code right after the closing
brace of HStack:
          Divider()
            HStack {
                //English button
                Button(action: {
                    
                }){
                    configureButton(buttonText: "Spanish")
                }.buttonStyle(ButtonFlash())
                Spacer()
                //Spanish flag
                Image("esFlag").resizable()
                    .border(Color.black, width: 1.5)
                    .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
            }
            Divider()
            
            HStack {
                //Italian button
                Button(action: {
                    
                }){
                    configureButton(buttonText: "Italian")
                }.buttonStyle(ButtonFlash())
                Spacer()
                //italian flag
                Image("itFlag").resizable()
                    .border(Color.black, width: 1.5)
                    .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
            }
The code starts with Divider, which is a very thin line that delineates the
first button from the second one. Then, we use another HStack, similar to
what we’ve just added for the English button. The only changes we make

--- Page 463 ---
here are for the text of the button so that it says Spanish, and the flag so
that it is the flag of Spain. After that, we use another Divider and then
create our Italian button.
Now, the buttons are complete, but they don’t do anything when they’re
pressed other than look nice. We need to make them functional and actually
select the individual languages. This is simple – we just have to access our
data model and change the language properties to the correct value, either
true or false.
Let’s start with the English button. Inside the body of the button, add the
following code:
                    appData.englishIsOn = true
                    appData.spanishIsOn = false
                    appData.italianIsOn = false
What we are doing here is accessing DataModel and changing
englishIsOnProperty to true because the English button was just pressed.
At the same time, we want to make sure that the Spanish and Italian
properties are set to false. Now, if the English button is pressed, only that
data file will be used to make a new random word.
Let’s add similar logic inside the Spanish button:
                    appData.englishIsOn = false
                    appData.spanishIsOn = true
                    appData.italianIsOn = false
For the Spanish button, we want to make sure that the other two languages’
properties are set to false, and that the Spanish property is set to true.
Finally, let’s add the following code to the Italian button:
                    appData.englishIsOn = false
                    appData.spanishIsOn = false
                    appData.italianIsOn = true

--- Page 464 ---
Now, all the buttons are complete, and they will implement the user’s
chosen language.
Adding a checkmark
However, we can improve the design a little bit here. Currently, when the
user presses the language buttons, there’s no indication that the button
selected anything. How about we add a checkmark next to the flag for the
selected language?
Let’s add another struct that will make checkmarks for the buttons. Add the
following struct under the ButtonFlash struct:
//add a checkmark
struct addCheckmark: View {
    var isLanguageOn: Bool = false
    var body: some View {
        VStack{
            Image(systemName: "checkmark.circle")
                .imageScale(.small).foregroundColor(.green)
                .font(Font.largeTitle.weight(.regular))
                .opacity(isLanguageOn ? 1.0 : 0)
        }
    }
}
I’m calling the struct addCheckmark and then creating a Boolean to check
which language has been selected. Inside the body of the struct, we create a
small checkmark, color it green, and set the opacity of the checkmark to
either fully visible or hidden, depending on whether the isLanguageOn
property is true or not.
Now, we can call this struct inside each HStack, so a checkmark will be
placed toward the flag side. For the sake of brevity, I will add the
checkmark code to the first HStack, but you need to add it to all three
HStack instances as well, in the same location that I use here:
  VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 10) {
            HStack {

--- Page 465 ---
                //english button
                Button(action: {
                    appData.englishIsOn = true
                    appData.spanishIsOn = false
                    appData.italianIsOn = false
                }){
                    configureButton(buttonText: "English")
                }.buttonStyle(ButtonFlash())
                Spacer()
                //english - checkmark appears when 
                  englishIsOn is true
                addCheckmark(isLanguageOn: 
                  appData.englishIsOn)
                //english flag
                Image("engFlag").resizable()
                    .border(Color.black, width: 1.5)
                    .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
            }
            Divider()
The code calls the addCheckmark struct, and a checkmark is added to each
button when pressed.
If you now run the app from ContentView, you will see that you can press
the information button to bring up the settings screen, select a language, and
then dismiss the screen by sliding it down.

--- Page 467 ---
Figure 13.3: The language buttons complete
Also, if you stop the app and run it again, note that your selection choice
will remain, as we store these settings internally in user defaults by using
the @AppStorage property wrapper in the data model.
We’re just about done with the settings view, but I’d like to add one more
modification here – how about giving the user another way of dismissing
the settings screen by adding a dismiss button, instead of just sliding down
from the top?
Adding a dismiss button
For the dismiss button, we’ll need a property that can access the app’s
environment. The environment is the part of the app that is generated
automatically for us, and it’s where we can access system-wide settings
such as the color scheme or layout direction.
It’s in this environment where we need to dismiss a screen, and to do so, we
first need to create a variable using the @Environment wrapper. Add this
underneath the ObservedObject property at the top of the SettingsView
file:
//dismiss the SettingsView
    @Environment(\.presentationMode) var presentationMode
Now, we will use this property to dismiss the view. Add this final HStack
just after the closing brace of the last HStack in the file:
          //MARK: - DISMISS BUTTON
             HStack(alignment: .center) {
                Spacer()
                
                Button(action: {
                    presentationMode.wrappedValue.dismiss()
                }){
                    HStack {
                        Image(systemName: "checkmark")
                        Text("Done")

--- Page 468 ---
                            .padding(.horizontal, 5)
                    }.padding(8)
                        .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, 
                          x: 1, y: 1)
                }.foregroundColor(Color.white)
                    .background(Color.green)
                     .cornerRadius(20).shadow(color: 
                       .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
                    .buttonStyle(ButtonFlash())
                
               Spacer()
            }
Firstly, we used two Spacer instances at the top and bottom of the code to
align the button in the center of this HStack.
Inside the button, the presentationMode property on the wrappedValue
property will gain access to the setting screen data, and then a call to the
dismiss function will close the settings screen.
The button is styled with a checkmark, and the text says Done. It also has a
little bit of padding and shadow, a green color, and finally, it calls the
ButtonFlash function so that it flashes like the other buttons.
Now, run the app from ContentView, and you can see that the dismiss
button works perfectly:

--- Page 470 ---
Figure 13.4: The Done button
This completes SettingsView. Let’s go back to ContentView and continue
styling the UI.
Styling the UI
In ContentView, let’s add some more features for the user; we’ll a
background, some animations to the game, as well as a word count and
language display label. Adding some more styling will help the UI come
alive.
Adding the background
We’ll start by adding a background to the scene. We currently have a title
and buttons that are styled with a wooden look, so let’s continue the
wooden theme and use a wood image as a background. Add the following
code after the closing brace of VStack:
    .background(Image("background").resizable()
          .edgesIgnoringSafeArea([.all])
          .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fill)
          .frame(width: 500, height: 800))
This code sets a wooden image as the background and uses the
edgesIgnoringSafeAreas modifier to stretch the background out to fill the
screen. Also, the aspect ratio is set to fill, and it sets a frame to size this
background image:

--- Page 472 ---
Figure 13.5: A wooden background
The background looks good, but it does introduce a small problem – we
need to change the color and size of the wordToPlayFrom property, as its
black color makes it hard to see against the wood background. Let’s do that
now. Just after the button code, we can style this Text view to make it look
better:
     //MARK: - WORD TO PLAY FROM
      Text("\(wordToPlayFrom)")
          .font(.custom("HelveticaNeue-Medium", size: 38))
          .foregroundColor(.white)
          .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
The code adds a custom Helvetica font with a size of 38 points, while
changing the color of the text to white and adding a shadow so that it stands
out a little more. This is what it looks like:

--- Page 474 ---
Figure 13.6: The styled base word
That looks much clearer now!
Adding animations to the game word
How about we also add some animation to the new word? We can use the
scaleEffect modifier to flip the word horizontally as it comes into view.
Let’s first add a property to track this animation, right after the other
properties in ContentView:
    @State private var horizontalFLip = false
Now, in the WORD TO PLAY FROM Pragma Mark, and right after the shadow
modifier, add the following code:
            .scaleEffect(x: horizontalFLip ? -1 : 1, y: 1)
            .scaleEffect(x: horizontalFLip ? -1 : 1, y: 1)
            .animation(.spring(dampingFraction:0.8),value: 
              horizontalFLip)
By calling the scaleEffect modifier twice, each call will flip the text
horizontally by 180° so that it completely makes one revolution,
horizontally, as it enters the screen. It also gets a spring animation applied
to it, which will make it grow and shrink just a little bit; you can control the
growth and shrinkage by setting the dampingFraction parameter to a lower
or higher value.
As well as this, we want the animation to start when the button is pressed
because that’s when a new word appears on the screen, so let’s toggle the
horizontalFlip Boolean inside the button:
//MARK: - BUTTON
      Button(action: {
          appData.getRandomWord()
          wordToPlayFrom = appData.baseWord

--- Page 475 ---
          horizontalFLip.toggle()
      }){
Before we try it out, let’s go a bit further with the new incoming word –
we’ll add pointing hands on each side of the new word and add a spring
animation as well. Let’s put the Text view that is displaying
wordToPlayFrom into HStack, like this:
HStack {
      Text(wordToPlayFrom)
          .font(.custom("HelveticaNeue-Medium", size: 38))
          .foregroundColor(.white)
          .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
          .scaleEffect(x: horizontalFLip ? -1 : 1, y: 1)
          .scaleEffect(x: horizontalFLip ? -1 : 1, y: 1)
          .animation(.spring(dampingFraction:0.8),value: 
            horizontalFLip)
  }
Next, let’s add some pointing hand images that will point to the word to
play from. The first image is the system image called hand.point.right,
and it goes inside HStack just above the Text view code, and the next image
is called the hand.point.left image, which gets placed below the Text
view code, again, all inside the HStack view we just added:
//MARK: - WORD TO PLAY FROM
 HStack () {
      //right hand image
      Image(systemName: "hand.point.right")
          .foregroundColor(.black)
          .font(.system(size: 30))
          .animation(.spring(dampingFraction:0.2),value: 
            horizontalFLip)
      
      Text(wordToPlayFrom)
          .font(.custom("HelveticaNeue-Medium", size: 38))
          .foregroundColor(.white)
          .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
          .scaleEffect(x: horizontalFLip ? -1 : 1, y: 1)
          .scaleEffect(x: horizontalFLip ? -1 : 1, y: 1)
          .animation(.spring(dampingFraction:0.8),value: 
            horizontalFLip)
      

--- Page 476 ---
      //left hand image
      Image(systemName:"hand.point.left")
         .foregroundColor(.black)
         .font(.system(size: 30))
         .padding(-4)
         .animation(.spring(dampingFraction:0.2),value: 
           horizontalFLip)
  }
The code starts off with a system image of a hand that’s pointing right,
setting the foreground color to black and setting the image size by using the
font modifier. Then, we add the spring animation to it, which has a
damping fraction of .4 (again, the larger the value, the less spring
animation there will be).
Then, we go to the left-hand image and do the same thing, setting its size
and color, as well as a little padding to position it a bit more to the left.
Also, the value parameter in the spring animation will be the
horizontalFlip Boolean property and toggled inside the button’s body,
which is how the animation gets triggered.
Now, give the app another go – you’ll see that every time you hit the button
to add a new word, not only does the word flip horizontally, and stretch and
shrink, but also the two hands bounce in and out as the word enters the
screen:

--- Page 478 ---
Figure 13.7: Animating the base word, plus the hand images
Before we continue with more enhancements, let’s fix one issue we have,
which is that the letterCount string only appears on the UI when the
button is pressed. It's much better to always have it on the UI and just
update it when the button is pressed. We can fix that with one line of code, a
call to the getRandomWord function in ContentView. Let’s add that call
down at the bottom of VStack, just after the frame modifier of the
background:
.onAppear (perform: appData.getRandomWord)
The onAppear modifier will call the getRandomWord function and populate
the letterCount string so that it always stays on the screen:

--- Page 480 ---
Figure 13.8: The word length and flag string displayed
Next, we need to implement the alert system to give the user feedback
about any words that don’t get accepted into the list.
Implementing user feedback with
alerts
The user can get a random word and try and make some words out of that
word in the language of their choice, but there are certain checks that we’ve
put in place that will stop those words from entering the list. Now, we need
to let the user know why a certain word is not acceptable, using SwiftUI
alerts.
Let’s go back into DataModel and fill out the displayErrorMessage
function stub with the appropriate code to get a message alert. Add the
following code right into the method:
//error message
    func displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: String, 
      description: String) {
        errorTitle = messageTitle
        errorDescription = description
        errorMessageIsShown = true
    }
The code takes the messageTitle string and assigns it to the errorTitle
property. Then, it takes the description string and assigns it to the
errorDescription property. After that, the errorMessagesIsShown
Boolean is set to true because at this point the function has been triggered,
and we’ll need to have this property set to true in order to initiate the alert
message.
Next, the displayErrorMessage function needs to be called in the right
place. If you remember from when we set up the addWordToListist
method earlier and added the method stubs in the data model, we also made
a call to the displayErrorMessage method. Here is a look at the complete

--- Page 481 ---
addWordToList method that has a call to displayErrorMessage, so there is
nothing for us to do there:
    func addWordToList() {
    let usersWord = 
      userEnteredWord.lowercased().trimmingCharacters(in: 
      .whitespacesAndNewlines)
    
    //guard against single letter words – they are too easy
    guard usersWord.count > 1 else {
        return
    }
    //is the word a duplicate
    guard isWordDuplicate(word: usersWord) else {
        displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: "You already used 
          this word", description: "Keep looking!")
        return
    }
    //is the word possible given your base word letters to 
      work with?
    guard isWordFoundInBaseWord(userGuessWord: usersWord)
      else {
        displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: "This word is not 
          possible", description: "Create only words from 
          the letters in the given word")
        return
    }
    //is the word a real word in the dictionary? - only 
      real words are allowed
    guard isWordInDictionary(word: usersWord) else {
        displayErrorMessage(messageTitle: "This is not a 
          valid word", description: "Use only real words")
        return
    }
    userEnteredWordsArray.insert(usersWord, at: 0)
    userEnteredWord = ""
  }
Here’s a quick refresher on how the addNewWord function works.
First, the word is made lowercase – that’s because all the word files are
lowercase, and it’s how we can compare words. Then, we trim out any
whitespaces that they might have typed into the text field.

--- Page 482 ---
The next line of code guards against single-letter words – again, there is
only a handful of those in any given language, and there’s no point in
including them in the game here.
Then, we start to check the user’s word to see whether it’s a duplicate word.
If it is, that means they added that word to the list already, so the
displayErrorMessage function will display an error message of You
already used this word, along with an instruction that says Keep looking.
The next guard statement checks whether the word is even possible to
make, given the letters the user is working with. If it’s not possible, the
displayErrorMessage function will be called and display the This word is
not possible error, along with an instruction that says Create only words
from the letters in the given word.
Next, the displayErrorMessage function will be called if the word is not a
real word in the chosen language, showing the user an alert that says This is
not a valid word, along with an instruction that says Use only real words.
Finally, after the user’s word has been processed and gone through all those
checks, it’s entered into userEnteredWordsArray. Remember, an array’s
elements are indexed, starting from 0, which is the beginning of the array.
The index is how we access different elements in an array, so in the
insert(at) method, we pass in the “0” value, which means inserting the
user’s word into the list at the beginning of the list, the top. This way, as the
user enters words, they will always be placed at the top of the list so they
are visible on the screen, and if there are many words, the user can scroll up
through the list to see them.
The final line of code sets the user-entered word back to an empty string,
ready to start the process again.
Now that we have the error alerts all set up, we just need to add the alert
modifier to make it functional. We can add it right after the onAppear
modifier in ContentView, like this:
     //add the alert popup
    .alert(isPresented: $appData.errorMessageIsShown) {

--- Page 483 ---
        Alert(title: Text(appData.errorTitle), message: 
          Text(appData.errorDescription), dismissButton: 
          .default(Text("OK")))
    }
The alert modifier has a parameter called isPresented, and this will
present an alert message when the errorMessageIsShown Boolean variable
becomes true. When it does become true, the code in the alert body – this
being the error title and description – gets executed.
Now, try it out. Enter a word that is already in the list, and you should see a
popup like this:

--- Page 485 ---
Figure 13.9: An alert message for duplicate words
If you enter a word that is not possible given the letters you have, you will
see this alert:

--- Page 487 ---
Figure 13.10: An alert message for words that are not possible using the
given word
And finally, if you enter a word that does not exist in the chosen language’s
dictionary, you will see this alert:

--- Page 489 ---
Figure 13.11: An alert message for words that are not real
Now, we have three different checks on the user’s words, just to give them
feedback and let them know where they went wrong. The user can then
press the OK button to dismiss the alert and continue playing.
Let’s now continue with the UI and add a footer view to display some more
information about the user’s progress in the game.
Adding a Footer View to display
more information
The Footer view that we will add will contain two pieces of information –
first, how many words the user has found so far, and second, what their
letter average is for each found word.
To do this, create a new SwiftUI View file and call it FooterView. This will
contain the Text views we need to display that information.
Now let’s get to work and add some code. Add the following properties
inside the FooterView struct:
struct FooterView: View {
    //MARK: - PROPERTIES
    @ObservedObject var appData = DataModel()
    @Binding var userEnteredWordsArray: [String]
    
    var foundWords: Double {
        let wordCount = userEnteredWordsArray.count
        //if theres no words in the array, return 0
        if wordCount == 0 {
            return 0
        }
        var letterAverage = 0
        //get a total of all the letters in each word
        for letterCount in userEnteredWordsArray {
            letterAverage += letterCount.count
        }
        return Double(letterAverage / wordCount)

--- Page 490 ---
    }
•••••••
As you recall, when we add a Binding variable to a struct, we need to
include it in the Previews struct; otherwise, we will get an Xcode error.
Modify the Previews struct as such to keep Xcode happy:
struct FooterView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
      FooterView( userEnteredWordsArray: .constant(["0"]))
          .previewLayout(.fixed(width: 350, height: 125))
  }
Okay, we are now error-free, so let’s go back to the FooterView struct and
review the code we just added there.
There’s a userEnteredWordsArray property that we will use to bind to the
ContentView struct later.
Next, we have a computed property called foundWords. A computed
property is a property that has a body and runs code in its body when the
property is accessed. The foundWords property displays how many words
the user has found so far by using the count property, which will return the
number of elements in userEnteredWordsArray. If there are no words in
the array, it will return 0.
Next, inside the foundWords computed property, we create a variable called
totalLetters and use it to hold all the letters of the user’s word. To get all
those letters, we use a for in loop to iterate through the array, storing the
amount of letters from each word the user enters on the list back in the
totalLetters variable.
Finally, the foundWords computed property returns all the letters from every
word divided by the number of words entered, which returns the average
amount of letters per word.
Now, let’s go into the body property and start designing two text views that
will display this information. Add the following code:

--- Page 491 ---
VStack {
    HStack(spacing: 80) {
        ZStack {
            Image("background").resizable()
            .frame(width: 80, height: 50)
            .clipShape(Capsule())
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: -1, y: -1)
            
            Text("\(userEnteredWordsArray.count)")
            .frame(width: 50, height: 20)
            .font(.system(size: 25))
            .padding(20)
            .foregroundColor(.white)
            .font(.system(size: 80))
               
            
            Image("foundWords").resizable()
            .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fill).frame(width: 
              100, height: 70)
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
            .offset(y: 40)
            .padding(.horizontal, -10)
            .padding(.bottom, -10)
         }
     }
         }
The first thing we do is style the background that the text will be placed
over. We use the background image from Assets catalog and set its size to a
width of 80 points and a height of 50 points. Then, we use the clipShape
modifier to turn the rectangle into a capsule and add some shadow to the
image. Note that we’re using the shadow modifier twice here – this gives
the image a more defined border than just a single call would.
Next, the text gets added, and by calling the count property on textField,
we can show how many words the user has found so far. Then, we set the
font size and add some padding and a foreground color of white.
We’re putting the images all inside three stacks:

--- Page 492 ---
Finally, we add the foundWords image, size it up, and give it a little bit of
shadow and some padding so that we can offset it downward from the text.
Now, we can add the other text, which will display the average amount of
letters per word. Just after the closing bracket of the ZStack, add the
following code:
ZStack {
        Image("background").resizable()
            .frame(width: 80, height: 50)
            .clipShape(Capsule())
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: -1, y: -1)
            
        Text("\(foundWords, specifier: "%.0f")")
            .frame(width: 50, height: 20)
            .font(.system(size: 25))
            .padding(20)
            .foregroundColor(Color.white)
            .font(.system(size: 80))
            
        Image("letterAverage").resizable()
            .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fill)
            .shadow(color: .black, radius: 1, x: 1, y: 1)
            .frame(width: 100, height: 70)
            .offset(y: 40)
            .padding(.bottom, -10)
    }
This code replicates the previous Text view we added, only this time we’re
displaying the foundWords computed property, which will show the letter
average from the foundWords array, and using the format specifier, it will
format the text view to two decimal places.
First, inside VStack to hold all of the views vertically on the screen
and line them up accordingly
Then, inside HStack, which will put the two textField instances we
need side by side horizontally
Finally, ZStack so that we can position the text directly over the
background image

--- Page 493 ---
Now, we can call FooterView inside ContentView. Let’s go back there and
add a call to FooterView at the end of the code in the main VStack:
//MARK: - FOOTER VIEW
    FooterView(userEnteredWordsArray: 
      $appData.userEnteredWordsArray)
Now, go ahead and try the app. Every word that you enter into the list will
be counted on the bottom-left side of the screen, and the average amount of
letters per word that you are getting will be displayed on the bottom-right
side:

--- Page 495 ---
Figure 13.12: Displaying the found words and letter average
From the figure, we can see that the given random word is cambering, and
I found 4 related words so far, so the footer view displays those 4 found
words. The letter average for those words is also displayed, 4 letters per
word.
Before we move on to more feedback, let’s just do one more check in the
addWordToList function. I want to be able to stop the user from entering
single-letter words, and that’s very easy to do. There are many single-letter
words in any given language, so it’s not really a big deal, but we might as
well prevent them anyway. Code inside the addWordToList function just
after userWord is declared:
//guard against one letter words - they are too easy
        guard usersWord.count > 1 else {
            return
        }
We’re checking the count of usersWord to see whether it’s greater than 1; if
not, we won’t allow single-letter words in the list and the function will just
return right here. Give it a try and you’ll see that you cannot enter single-
letter words.
Up next, in the spirit of giving the user feedback, we’ll continue and add
haptics and audio to the game.
Adding haptics and button sounds
Haptics are a form of sensory feedback that works by accessing the internal
vibration hardware on an iPhone, providing a physical response when the
phone is being used. You are probably familiar with haptics, as it’s felt
every time we set our phones to vibrate. We won’t use a full vibration but
just a brief one that the user can feel every time they click on a button.
The best place to add such code is in the button itself, so let’s do that. We’re
going to use the UIImpactFeedbackGenerator class for this, and it is

--- Page 496 ---
actually quite simple to implement. First, inside ContentView, we need an
instance of that class underneath all the properties that we already added:
//haptic feedback
var hapticImpact = UIImpactFeedbackGenerator(style: 
  .medium)
We have set the hapticImpact variable style to medium, but you can set the
vibration to heavy, light, ridged, or soft.
Now, to use this, we just simply call this variable inside the button like this:
            //MARK: - BUTTON
            Button(action: {
                hapticImpact.impactOccurred()
                appData.getRandomWord()
             
                   •••••••          
And that’s it – every time the New Word button is pressed, the user will
feel a slight vibration on their finger. In order to try this out, you actually
have to run this on a device, as you cannot use haptics in the simulator.
Since we’ve implemented haptics here with the ContentView button, how
about we also add it to the SettingsView language buttons? Let’s go into
SettingsView and add the same code as we did here. First, create an
instance of the UIImpactFeedbackGenerator class at the top of the file, in
SettingsView:
    //haptic feedback
       var hapticImpact = UIImpactFeedbackGenerator(style: 
         .light)
Now, in each of the three language buttons, add the following code:
hapticImpact.impactOccurred()
And that’s it – it’s very easy to implement tactile feedback for the user.

--- Page 497 ---
And how about one other form of feedback that we are already familiar
with – audio? We can add a button click sound to the New Word button, so
not only does the user feel the button being pressed but they also hear it.
We have already done this several times, so for the sake of brevity, I won’t
go over the code; instead, you can simply refer back to many of the other
projects in which we’ve added audio (such as our record player project).
As we always do, we create a new SwiftUI file called PlaySound and add
the following code to the file:
import Foundation
import AVFoundation
var player: AVAudioPlayer?
func playSound(sound: String, type: String) {
    if let path = Bundle.main.path(forResource: sound, 
      ofType: type) {
        do {
        player = try AVAudioPlayer(contentsOf: 
          URL(fileURLWithPath: path))
        player?.play()
        
        } catch {
            print("Could not load audio file")
        }
    }
}
Now that we have our sound file, all we need to do is use it inside the body
of the New Word button:
playSound(sound: "buttonClick", type: "m4a")
And that completes the sound.
Now, the user has three forms of feedback when they press the New Word
button – they see the button being pressed because, during the press, the
button changes its form, they feel the impact with their finger because we
accessed the internal vibration motor of the phone, and they hear a clicking

--- Page 498 ---
sound. This feedback all comes together to give the user a more enriched
and tactile experience when interacting with the app.
Summary
In this project, we built a complete app from start to finish and included
different animations along the way.
We organized properties and functions in a data model, created separate
header and footer views, implemented a picker control, and created some
specific functions that can process and check a word’s authenticity within
three different languages. We also implemented user feedback in three
different ways – in the form of pop-up alerts to the user, in the form of
haptic feedback, and as audio. Plus, we’ve added three languages to the
game to make it educational for users learning languages.
How about taking the gamer further by adding some more animations to it,
by revisiting previous projects and using code that you already
implemented into different areas of the game? For example, if the user gets
a certain number of words in their list, they could be rewarded with points
that get displayed in an animated label at the top. Alternatively, we could
add another button that will ask the user to find only words that are
palindromes.
In the next chapter, we will build another game – this time, a color-
matching game.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 499 ---
Creating a Color Game
In the last chapter, we built a game where the user had to find words by
using the letters of a larger word. In this project, we will continue the
“finding” theme and build another game, where the user must find colors
within a broader color.
The goal of this project will be to generate a random RGB color and then
have the user manipulate separate sliders for each of the individual RGB
values in order to completely match that random color. For example, there
will be one slider for red, one slider for green, and one slider for blue, with
each slider containing a range from 0 to 255 (the range of each RGB value).
Then, the user will have to adjust those sliders to see whether they can find
the exact RGB random color.
We will also add three difficulty levels to the game, from easy to extreme.
And if the user is skilled enough to work out the individual RGB values in
the given color, we will display a shower of confetti over the user interface.
In building this game, you will learn about adding pre-built animations to a
project using Swift packages, which includes the aforementioned confetti
animation for when the user gets a high score. We will also add a spring
animation to SwiftUI sliders and make them visible when needed, and
invisible when not.
So, in this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Understanding colors
Creating the Title View
Creating the target and guess circles
Creating the Picker View
Creating the target and guess rectangles
Making the color sliders

--- Page 500 ---
Technical requirements
As always, you can find the code and download the completed project from
the Chapter 14 folder on GitHub:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-Applications.
Understanding colors
Before we begin, let’s just have a quick look at colors. There are two color
models that you may be familiar with, primary colors and RGB colors.
Primary colors are the basic colors from which all other colors can be
derived. In traditional color theory, the primary colors are red, blue, and
yellow. Primary colors are used in many different fields, such as art,
printing, and graphic design.
RGB (which is short for Red, Green, and Blue) colors make up a color
model in which the colors are combined to create different intensities of
red, green, and blue light that can be displayed on electronic displays and
devices, such as computers, TVs, phones, and tablets.
RGB colors are represented by their red, green, and blue components, each
of which has a value between 0 and 255. The value 0 represents the absence
of that color, while 255 represents the maximum intensity of that color. By
varying the values of the RGB components, a wide range of colors can be
created. For example, (255, 0, 0) represents pure red, (0, 255, 0) represents
pure green, and (0, 0, 255) represents pure blue. Combinations of these
colors can create many different colors and hues of colors.
Keeping track of the user’s score with a button
Showing the user’s score in an Alert View
Resetting the game
Adding a background
Adding confetti using Swift packages

--- Page 501 ---
We will be adding three sliders, which will represent each RGB color, and
the user has to manipulate those sliders to find a target color by combining
different amounts of those RGB colors.
Let’s jump right in and get this game off the ground. We’ll start by adding a
title to the user interface.
Creating the Title view
Let’s get started by creating a new Xcode project – I’m calling it Find the
Colors. We will build this project from the top down, with all of the code
placed in a VStack to organize the views vertically.
The first objective here will be to give the UI a title; it’s not a lot of code,
but we’ll still put it in its own file anyway. So, create a new SwiftUI View
file, and call it TitleView, then add the following code to the body
property:
struct TitleView: View {
    var body: some View {
        HStack {
            Text("Find").foregroundColor(.red)
            Text("The").foregroundColor(.green)
            Text("Color").foregroundColor(.blue)
        } .foregroundColor(.blue)
            .fontWeight(.black)
            .font(Font.system(size: 35, design: .serif))
    }
}
Inside the HStack, there are three Text views, each with different colors –
"Find" with the red color, "The" with green, and "Color" with blue – all
colored using the foregroundColor modifier.
After the HStack, three additional modifiers are applied to the view. The
first is .foregroundColor(.blue), which sets the text color of all the Text
views to blue. The next is .fontWeight(.black), which sets the font
weight of all the Text views to bold. And lastly, .font(Font.system(size:

--- Page 502 ---
35, design: .serif)) sets the font and size of all the Text views to 35
points with a Serif design font.
Next, we’ll go back into ContentView and display the title by adding the
following code:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
                //MARK: - TITLE
                 TitleView().padding()
        }
    }
}
I also added some padding so the Title view won’t be too close to the
notch at the top of the iPhone when we finish adding all the views.
And now, we can see the colorful title that starts off the UI:

--- Page 504 ---
Figure 14.1: Game title
With that, we can move on to the next part of the UI, the target and guess
circles.
Creating the target and guess
circles
The next task is to create two colored circles:
These two circles will be created in their own SwiftUI file, so let’s make
them now. Press Command + N, select SwiftUI View, and call it
TargetAndGuessCircleView.
We want to use this file inside of ContentView – in order to do so, we will
need some Binding variables inside the struct:
struct TargetAndGuessCircleView: View {
    //target variables
    @Binding var redTarget: Double
    @Binding var greenTarget: Double
    @Binding var blueTarget: Double
    
    //guess variables
    @Binding var redGuess: Double
    @Binding var greenGuess: Double
    @Binding var blueGuess: Double
    
    //picker variable
One circle will be the target circle, which will show a randomly
generated color; because it is an RGB color, the user will need to
combine three RGB values to find this target color.
The other circle will be their “guess” circle – kind of like a sketchpad,
where the user can see their current progress as they manipulate the
sliders.

--- Page 505 ---
    @Binding var selectedPickerIndex: Int
           •••••••
There are seven variables needed for this file – three variables for the target
circle, three variables for the guess circle, and one integer (which we will
use for a Picker view) will allow the user to select a difficulty level.
After adding those Binding properties, we notice we have an error in the
previews struct. Remember that when we add these variables to a file, the
previews struct always has to be updated with some dummy data in order
for it to work again. So, modify the previews struct so it looks like this:
struct TargetAndGuessCircleView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        TargetAndGuessCircleView(redTarget: .constant(0.3), 
        greenTarget: .constant(0.2), blueTarget: 
        .constant(0.7), redGuess: .constant(0.7), 
        greenGuess: .constant(0.4), blueGuess: 
        .constant(0.7), selectedPickerIndex: .constant(2))
    }
}
After that, let’s go back into the body property. We want to add a ZStack so
that we can overlay the target circle over the guess circle. We can create
these two circles with the following code:
ZStack {
    //MARK: - GUESS CIRCLE
    if selectedPickerIndex == 0 {
        Circle()
            .fill(Color(red: redGuess, green: greenTarget,
              blue: blueTarget, opacity: 1.0))
            .frame(height: 200)
    }
    else if selectedPickerIndex == 1 {
        Circle()
            .fill(Color(red: redGuess, green: greenGuess,
              blue: blueTarget, opacity: 1.0))
    .frame(height: 200)
    }
    else if selectedPickerIndex == 2 {
        Circle()

--- Page 506 ---
            .fill(Color(red: redGuess, green: greenGuess,
              blue: blueGuess, opacity: 1.0))
            .frame(height: 200)
    }
     
     //MARK: - TARGET CIRCLE
     Circle()
        .fill(Color(red: redTarget, green: greenTarget,
          blue: blueTarget, opacity: 1.0))
        .frame(height: 80)
}
Inside the ZStack, we start off with the guess circle; this will be the bigger
circle, with the frame height set to 200. Here, we’re using an if else
statement and checking the selectedPickerIndex variable to see what
difficulty level the user has chosen. If they’ve chosen Easy, the index will
be equal to 0; in that case, we will supply the green and blue RGB target
colors to the user, so they only have to work out the red RGB target value.
If they’ve selected Hard, the index will be 1; in that case, we only supply
the user with the blue RGB value, and they have to work out the red and
green values themselves. Finally, if the user selected the Extreme option,
the index will be 2; in that case, we don’t supply the user with any RGB
target values and they have to work out the individual target color value
themselves.
Next, we create the target circle – this will be the randomly generated
colored circle that the user has to try and match by manipulating the sliders.
Notice that we’re creating this circle much smaller, only 80 points, and
because we are in a ZStack, this circle will be on top of the guess circle.
The reason for this overlaying of circles is that as the user is trying to work
out the colors, their guess circle will change in color and they can better
visualize how close they are to the target color.
Lastly, at the end of the ZStack, we’re using the onAppear modifier. This
modifier will run an action every time the ZStack gets redrawn; if the
ZStack gets redrawn, it means the user chose to play a new game (using a
button that we will create later) and the sliders will go back to 0.
That finishes up the TargetAndGuessCircleView file. Let’s go back into
ContentView and add the State variables that we need in order to display

--- Page 507 ---
TargetAndGuessCircleView:
//target variables
    @State var redTarget = Double.random(in: 0..<1)
    @State var greenTarget = Double.random(in: 0..<1)
    @State var blueTarget = Double.random(in: 0..<1)
    //guess variables
    @State var redGuess: Double
    @State var greenGuess: Double
    @State var blueGuess: Double
    //picker variable
    @State var selectedPickerIndex = 1
There are seven State properties, one for each of the Binding properties we
made in the previous file. The variables are each set to a random double
value between 0 and 1 using the Double.random(in: 0..<1) method. The
function will generate a new random number every time it’s called,
meaning that every time the user starts a new game, a new random value
will be used to pick an RGB value.
Continuing from here, we notice that there’s an error in the Previews struct
of ContentView. This is a familiar error – it is Xcode telling us that we
declared a property in the ContentView struct, yet we are not including it
here in the Previews struct. Let’s fix that by inputting some data into the
Previews struct, like so:
ContentView(redGuess: 0.5, greenGuess: 0.5, blueGuess: 0.5)
That will fix the error in ContentView, but we also need to update the Swift
file that contains the main startup code for the project. That file will be
named the same as what you named your app – I named this project Find
the Color, so in the Project Navigator to the left of Xcode, there will be a
file with a Swift extension, called Find_The_ColorApp.swift.
Click on that Swift file, and update the code to the following:
@main
struct Find_The_ColorApp: App {
  var body: some Scene {
      WindowGroup {

--- Page 508 ---
          ContentView(redGuess: 0.5, greenGuess: 0.5,
            blueGuess: 0.5)
      }
  }
}
We can now go back into ContentView, call the
TargetAndGuessCircleView file, and pass in the appropriate State
variables. Add the following code directly underneath the title code:
//MARK: - TARGET AND GUESS CIRCLES
    TargetAndGuessCircleView(redTarget: $redTarget,
      greenTarget: $greenTarget, blueTarget: $blueTarget,
      redGuess: $redGuess, greenGuess: $greenGuess,
      blueGuess: $blueGuess, selectedPickerIndex:
      $selectedPickerIndex)
This is how the UI should look now:

--- Page 510 ---
Figure 14.2: Target and guess circles
Let’s continue by adding the Picker view to allow the user to select the
difficulty for the game.
Creating the Picker view
To create the Picker view, let’s make a new SwiftUI View file called
PickerView for this purpose.
Inside this file, we need to add a Binding property so that we can use it
inside ContentView, as well as add an array of titles for the picker:
    @Binding var selectedPickerIndex: Int
    @State var levels = ["Easy 😌 ", "Hard 😓 ", "Extreme! 
       "]
The code here has a Binding variable to hold the value of
selectedPickerIndex; that way, we can keep track of which button on the
picker the user has selected. Then, we have a State array of titles that we
will use on the individual picker buttons, along with an appropriate emoji
signifying the difficulty level.
Next, as we’ve done before, update the Previews struct with some dummy
data, to satisfy Xcode:
struct PickerView_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        PickerView(selectedPickerIndex: .constant(1))
    }
}
With the previews up and running, we can now create and style the Picker
control. Move into the body property and add this code:
 var body: some View {
  VStack {
      Picker("Numbers", selection: $selectedPickerIndex) {

--- Page 511 ---
              ForEach(0 ..< levels.count, id: \.self) { 
                index in
                  Text(levels[index])
              }
          }
          .pickerStyle(SegmentedPickerStyle())
          .background(Color.yellow)
          .cornerRadius(8)
          .padding(.horizontal)
          .shadow(color: Color.black, radius: 2, y: 4)
          .padding(.top)
      
      Text("Difficulty Level: " + 
        "\(levels[selectedPickerIndex])").bold()
          .padding(5)
          .animation(.easeInOut(duration: 0.2), value:
            selectedPickerIndex)
      }
  }
}
This is what we are doing here.
The code adds a Picker component and a Text component. The VStack is
used to arrange the Picker and Text components vertically. Picker is used
to display a list of options, with the options being the elements in the
levels array; it takes two arguments: Numbers and selection:
$selectedPickerIndex, where Numbers is the label for the picker and
$selectedPickerIndex is a state variable that keeps track of the currently
selected option.
The ForEach loop is used to iterate through the levels array, creating a new
Text component for each element in the array. Each Text component is
configured to display the corresponding element from the levels array.
The pickerStyle method is used to change the appearance of the picker to
a segmented picker style. We have used the background, cornerRadius,
padding, and shadow modifiers before, and these apply various visual styles
to the picker.
The Text component is used to display the difficulty level in the UI under
the Picker component. It takes the "Difficulty Level: " + "

--- Page 512 ---
(levels[selectedPickerIndex])" string and makes it bold, then applies
some padding and animation to it. The animation is added so that instead of
the difficulty level string appearing and disappearing instantly, it will ease
in and out with a 0.2-second duration, for a smoother transition in the UI.
Now, we have a Picker component that can be used to select the difficulty
level of the game, and a Text string to display that level.
The result is shown here:

--- Page 514 ---
Figure 14.3: The segmented picker
With the Picker control done, move back into ContentView and call
PickerView directly under the target and guess circle code:
//MARK: - PICKER
    PickerView(selectedPickerIndex: $selectedPickerIndex)
That code will add the PickerView file into the UI under the target and
guess circles. The result is shown here:

--- Page 516 ---
Figure 14.4: The picker in the UI
Now, if you click on the picker, you will see that the guess circle changes
color; it won’t change to more than three shades of colors, as the picker
displays a random color from each RGB value while the preview is running.
If you stop the preview and restart it, another set of three random colors will
be displayed.
Shortly, we will implement sliders to change the guess circle colors, and
change the target circle color when the user starts a new game. Before that,
let’s continue with the next part of the UI, making target and guess
rectangles. I’ll explain what they are for next.
Creating the target and guess
rectangles
So far, we have given the user a guess circle so they can see how close they
are coming to the target color. Let’s do something similar to that and give
them another visual cue – let’s create a guess rectangle and a target
rectangle, and put them directly under the Picker control. We can also add
an RGB value indicator, so they can see the actual values of each slider as
they change, which can be helpful when they’re trying to figure out how
much of the slider they need to move and in which direction.
Start by creating a new file to make these rectangles, called
TargetAndGuessRectView. This file will contain very similar code to the
TargetAndGuessCircleView file, which means adding the needed Binding
properties:
    @Binding var redTarget: Double
    @Binding var greenTarget: Double
    @Binding var blueTarget: Double
    @Binding var redGuess: Double
    @Binding var greenGuess: Double
    @Binding var blueGuess: Double
    @Binding var selectedPickerIndex: Int

--- Page 517 ---
You should be familiar with these Binding variables, as we’ve created them
before in the TargetAndGuessCircleView file. Actually, you can refactor all
the code and combine the two guess and target files into one file if you’d
like, or create a data model and make the properties available to all the
files... I’ll leave that as a challenge for you.
Moving on, we need a combination of VStacks and HStacks to position the
Rectangle and Text views. Add this code to the body of the file (I’ll
explain it all next):
var body: some View {
  VStack {
      HStack {
          //MARK: - TARGET RECTANGLE
          VStack {
              Rectangle()
                  .foregroundColor(Color(red: redTarget,
                    green: greenTarget, blue: blueTarget, 
                    opacity: 1.0))
                  .cornerRadius(5)
                  .padding(.init(top: 0, leading: 10, 
                    bottom: 0, trailing: 0))
                  .frame(height: 40)
              Text("Target Color to Match").bold()
          }
          //MARK: - GUESS RECTANGLE
          VStack {
              if selectedPickerIndex == 0 {
                  Rectangle()
                      .foregroundColor(Color(red: redGuess,
                        green: greenTarget, blue: 
                        blueTarget, opacity: 1.0))
                      .modifier(rectModifier())
              }
             else if selectedPickerIndex == 1 {
                  Rectangle()
                .foregroundColor(Color(red: redGuess,
                  green: greenGuess, blue: blueTarget,
                  opacity: 1.0))
                .modifier(rectModifier())
         }
              else if selectedPickerIndex == 2 {
                   Rectangle()
                      .foregroundColor(Color(red: redGuess,
                        green: greenGuess, blue: blueGuess,

--- Page 518 ---
                        opacity: 1.0))
                      .modifier(rectModifier())
              }
              HStack {
                  Image(systemName: "r.circle.fill")
                      .foregroundColor(.red)
                  Text("\(Int(redGuess * 255.0))")
                      .font(.callout)
                  Image(systemName: "g.circle.fill")
                      .foregroundColor(.green)
                  Text("\(Int(greenGuess * 255.0))")
                      .font(.callout)
                  Image(systemName: "b.circle.fill")
                      .foregroundColor(.blue)
                  Text("\(Int(blueGuess * 255.0))")
                      .font(.callout)
              }
           }
      }
        }
    }
}
struct rectModifier : ViewModifier {
    func body(content: Content) -> some View {
        content
            .cornerRadius(5)
            .padding(.init(top: 0, leading: 0, bottom: 0,
              trailing: 10))
            .frame(height: 40)
    }
}
Here’s a breakdown of what the code is doing.
The first VStack contains a rectangle with the color determined by the
values of redTarget, greenTarget, and blueTarget. It also has a corner
radius of 5 and padding on the leading edge, with a height of 40. Below the
rectangle, there is a Text view displaying the "Target Color to Match"
string in bold font.
The second VStack contains a rectangle with the color determined by the
values of redGuess, greenGuess, and blueGuess, and is modified by the
rectModifier struct (more on the rectModifier struct in a moment). The
color of the rectangle is determined by selectedPickerIndex, which is an

--- Page 519 ---
integer value. If selectedPickerIndex is 0, the color is determined by
redGuess, greenTarget, and blueTarget. If selectedPickerIndex is 1, the
color is determined by redGuess, greenGuess, and blueTarget. If
selectedPickerIndex is 2, the color is determined by redGuess, and
greenGuess, blueGuess. Below the rectangle, there is an HStack containing
an image and text displaying the values of redGuess, greenGuess, and
blueGuess, respectively.
Now the target and guess rectangles are in place, as well as the three Text
views that will display the RGB values as the user works the slider, let’s
continue and look at that last bit of code, the rectModifer struct.
The rectModifier struct is a ViewModifier that modifies the Rectangle
view. It is a struct that conforms to the ViewModifier protocol and defines a
single method, body(content: Content) -> some View, which takes a
single argument content of the Content type and returns a modified version
of that content wrapped in a view.
In this specific case, the struct is modifying the appearance of a rectangle
view. The modifications are made by chaining together a series of view
modifiers on the content parameter in the body method, such as setting the
corner radius to 5, adding padding to the trailing edge, and setting the
height of the rectangle to 40.
When rectModifier() is called, it is passed the rectangle view as the
content parameter, and it applies the modifications defined in the struct to
that rectangle view, returning the modified version of that view. In other
words, rectModifier() is a simple way to package a set of modifiers that
can be applied to any view, and it provides a way to reuse the same set of
modifiers on multiple views, saving on coding time and readability.
Here is the result of what we just coded:

--- Page 521 ---
Figure 14.5: Target and guess rectangles
The sliders will now display the RGB values for the user.
Now, it’s time to go back into the ContentView and make a call to this file
directly underneath the Picker code so that we can display these two
rectangles and text in the main UI:
 //MARK: - TARGET AND GUESS RECTANGLES
    TargetAndGuessRectView(redTarget: $redTarget,
      greenTarget: $greenTarget, blueTarget: $blueTarget,
      redGuess: $redGuess, greenGuess: $greenGuess,
      blueGuess: $blueGuess, selectedPickerIndex:
      $selectedPickerIndex)
Again, this is familiar code – we are simply calling
TargetAndGuessRectView and passing in the appropriate State variables.
Here is the result:

--- Page 523 ---
Figure 14.6: Target and Guess Rectangles in the UI
We just need the sliders, and a button to check the score, so let’s do that
now.
Making the color sliders
To start creating the sliders, make a new SwiftUI View file and call it
SliderView.
As the sliders are only used to manipulate the guess circle, we won’t need
any Target variables in this file. Instead, we just need three Guess
variables, as well as a variable to track the value of the picker control,
which you can add like this:
    @Binding var redGuess: Double
    @Binding var greenGuess: Double
    @Binding var blueGuess: Double
    @Binding var selectedPickerIndex: Int
Again, we need to update the Previews struct, because it’s giving us this
error: Missing arguments for parameters redGuess, greenGuess,
blueGuess, selectedPickerIndex in call. This error is telling us, as it has
before, to include the Binding variables in its SliderView struct initializer.
Let’s give it what it wants, by updating Previews with the following code:
struct StyleTheSliders_Previews: PreviewProvider {
    static var previews: some View {
        SliderView(redGuess: .constant(0.5), greenGuess: 
          .constant(0.5), blueGuess: .constant(0.5), 
          selectedPickerIndex: .constant(1))
    }
}
With the previews operational again, let’s continue by making a separate
struct for the creation of the slider itself. Add CreateSlider outside and
underneath the SliderView struct:

--- Page 524 ---
struct CreateSlider: View {
    @Binding var value: Double
    var color: Color
    var body: some View {
        HStack {
            Text("0")
                .bold()
                .foregroundColor(color)
            
            Slider(value: $value, in: 0.0...1.0)
            Text("255")
                .bold()
                .foregroundColor(color)
        }.padding(.init(top: 10, leading: 10, bottom: 10, 
          trailing: 10))
    }
}
This code defines a new SwiftUI struct called CreateSlider that takes in
two parameters: a Binding variable called value of the Double type, and a
variable called color of the Color type.
Here is what each line of code does.
As we’ve seen before, @Binding var value: Double is a property wrapper
that creates a two-way binding between the struct’s value variable and
another variable. This allows the struct to read and write the value of the
variable that it is bound to.
var color: Color creates a variable called color that is of the Color type.
Text("0") creates a Text view with a value of 0, and gets the following
modifiers placed on it: .bold() makes the text bold, and
foregroundColor(color) sets the color of the text to the color variable
passed to the struct.
Then we add the slider, Slider(value: $value, in: 0.0...1.0). This
creates a Slider view that reads and writes its value to the value property.
The in parameter sets the range of the slider to go from 0.0 to 1.0.

--- Page 525 ---
Then, we add another Text view, add the text 255, and put some padding on
it using .padding(.init(top: 10, leading: 10, bottom: 10,
trailing: 10)). This is a View modifier that adds a padding of 10 points to
the top, leading, bottom, and trailing edge of the view.
With the slider created, we will need to call this CreateSlider struct
several times inside the SliderView struct and add some styling to it as
well. So, back up into the SliderView struct, add the following code:
var body: some View {
    //MARK: - SLIDERS FOR THE GUESS CIRCLE
    VStack {
        //red slider - this slider will always be visible
          and represents the "Easy" option on the picker
        CreateSlider(value: $redGuess, color: .red)
            .background(Capsule().stroke(Color.red,
              lineWidth: 3))
            .padding(.horizontal)
            .accentColor(.red)
            .padding(5)
        
        switch selectedPickerIndex {
        case 1:
            //green slider - shown when the "Hard" option 
              is selected
            CreateSlider(value: $greenGuess, color: .green)
                .background(Capsule().stroke(Color.green,
                  lineWidth: 4))
                .padding(.horizontal)
                .accentColor(.green)
                .padding(5)
        case 2:
          //blue slider - this is shown when the 
            "Extreme" option is selected
              CreateSlider(value: $greenGuess, color:
                .green)
                  .background(Capsule().stroke(Color.green,
                    lineWidth: 4))
                  .padding(.horizontal)
                  .accentColor(.green)
                  .padding(5)
              
              CreateSlider(value: $blueGuess, color: .blue)
                  .background(Capsule().stroke(Color.blue,
                    lineWidth: 4))

--- Page 526 ---
                  .padding(.horizontal)
                  .accentColor(.blue)
                  .padding(5)
          default:
              EmptyView()
          }
      }
  }
Let’s break this code down. It starts off by defining a SwiftUI view called
SliderView that uses a VStack to lay out three sliders for adjusting the
values of the redGuess, greenGuess, and blueGuess properties. The struct
has a VStack used to organize three sliders vertically.
Those three sliders are added by calls to the CreateSlider view. The
CreateSlider view uses the background modifier and a capsule shape in
order to outline the slider with a red color.
Next up is a switch statement – since we are using one for the first time, let
me explain what it is and the difference between using a switch statement
and an if else statement.
So, an if else statement is used to evaluate a Boolean expression and
execute a block of code if the expression is true, and another block of code
if the expression is false. It can be used for any type of condition or
comparison. A switch statement, on the other hand, is used to match a
value or expression against multiple possible cases and execute a block of
code for the matching case.
A switch statement is typically used for matching against multiple possible
values for a single variable or expression and is often used for situations
where multiple conditions need to be checked in a more concise and
readable way. For example, when you have multiple conditions with
multiple if else statements, you can use a switch statement over if else.
It makes the code more readable and easier to maintain.
Note

--- Page 527 ---
In general, if else statements are good for complex conditions, while
switch statements are good for simple conditions. In Swift, you can use
either, depending on what you are trying to accomplish.
So, going back to our code, the switch statement checks the
selectedPickerIndex value to see whether it is equal to 1; if so, it means
the user selected the Hard level, so we need to add a green slider to the UI.
If the selectedPickerIndex value is equal to 2, it will create both the green
and blue sliders, because the user has selected the Extreme option, so all
sliders will be visible. Lastly, if selectedPickerIndex is not 1 or 2, it will
return an empty view.
Next, the CreateSlider struct is used to create the sliders, and it takes two
arguments, value and color. It displays the minimum and maximum values
of the slider and it uses the color argument to change the color of the "0"
text view and the "255" text view.
SliderView uses the CreateSlider struct to create the sliders for RGB
colors. The selectedPickerIndex binding is used to decide which sliders
to show, based on the user’s selection.
SliderView is now complete, so let’s use it inside ContentView. Add the
following code just after the Picker code:
 //MARK: - SLIDER
    Spacer()
    SliderView(redGuess: $redGuess, greenGuess: 
      $greenGuess, blueGuess: $blueGuess, 
      selectedPickerIndex: $selectedPickerIndex)
        .scaleEffect(1)
        .animation(.interactiveSpring(response: 0.4, 
          dampingFraction: 0.5, blendDuration: 0.5), value: 
          selectedPickerIndex)
     Spacer()
This code calls the SliderView struct and fills in the Binding variables,
then adds a spring animation to the sliders as they appear and disappear in
the UI. The interactiveSpring animation is a type of animation that
simulates the behavior of a spring, and takes three parameters:

--- Page 528 ---
As well as the interactiveSpring animation, we’re using the scaleEffect
modifier and passing in a value of 1. What this does is help smooth out the
animation as each slider appears and disappears. Go ahead and try it out. If
you click on the picker control to choose a difficulty level, each slider will
appear and disappear on the screen with a springy animation to it:
response: This value controls the stiffness of the spring. A lower value
will result in a softer spring, and a higher value will result in a stiffer
spring. A value of 0.4 will provide a moderate stiffness.
dampingFraction: This value controls the damping of the spring,
which is a measure of how quickly the spring’s oscillations will die out.
A lower value will result in a spring with less damping, and a higher
value will result in a spring with more damping. A value of 0.5 means
that the spring’s oscillations will die out relatively quickly.
blendDuration: This value controls the duration of the animation’s
blending. A lower value will result in a shorter blend duration, and a
higher value will result in a longer blend duration. A value of 0.5
seconds is a moderate blend duration.

--- Page 530 ---
Figure 14.7: The sliders
As you move the sliders, the guess circle color will update smoothly, and
the RGB values will change in the RGB text string.
The last UI component to add is a button that will let the user check their
score as they play.
Keeping track of the user’s score
with a button
To make this a game, the user needs a way to check their progress and see a
number that reflects how close they are to a perfect score/color match.
Let’s add a button right after the SliderView struct’s Spacer() in
ContentView:
 //MARK: - BUTTON
    Button(action: {
         
    }) {
        Text("Check Score")
            .foregroundColor(.black)
            .padding(EdgeInsets(top: 12, leading: 20, 
              bottom: 12, trailing: 20))
            .background(Color.yellow)
            .cornerRadius(20)
            .shadow(color: Color.black, radius: 2, y: 4)
    }
This code creates a Button view, which we have named Check Score. The
button gets styled with a black foreground, yellow background, padding, a
corner radius, and finally, a black shadow to make the button stand out a bit.
The body of the button is currently empty right now, but what we want to
do is to put some code in there that will trigger an alert and show the user
their current score, so that they know how close they are to the target value.

--- Page 531 ---
To do this, we need to create a function that calculates a score. So, at the
bottom of the ContentView struct, add this code:
func calculateScore() -> Int {
        let redDiff = redGuess - redTarget
        let greenDiff = greenGuess - greenTarget
        let blueDiff = blueGuess - blueTarget
        let easyDifference = redDiff * redDiff
        let hardDifference = easyDifference + greenDiff * 
          greenDiff
        let extremeDifference = hardDifference + blueDiff * 
          blueDiff
        let calculatedDifference: Double
        switch selectedPickerIndex {
            case 0:
                calculatedDifference = sqrt(easyDifference)
            case 1:
                calculatedDifference = sqrt(hardDifference)
            case 2:
                calculatedDifference = 
                  sqrt(extremeDifference)
            default:
                calculatedDifference = 0.0
        }
        return Int((1.0 - calculatedDifference) * 100 + 
          0.5)
    } 
This code defines a function named calculateScore that returns an Int
value. This function is used to calculate a score based on the difference
between the guess values of red, green, and blue, and the target values of
red, green, and blue.
Here’s how it works. The function first calculates the difference between
the guess values and the target values for red, green, and blue. Next, it
calculates easyDifference by getting the square root of the redDiff
variable. Next, it calculates hardDifference by adding the square of the
greenDiff variable to easyDifference. Then, it calculates
extremeDifference by adding the square root of blueDiff to
hardDifference.

--- Page 532 ---
After that, it uses a switch statement to determine which level of difficulty
is currently selected, and assigns the calculatedDifference variable a
value based on that:
Finally, it returns an integer value that is calculated by taking (1.0 -
calculatedDifference) * 100 + 0.5, which is the final score.
This function is used to calculate a score based on how close the guess
values are to the target values. The smaller the difference between the
values, the higher the score will be. If the guess value is equal to the
target value, the user gets a perfect score of 100.
Now, the calculateScore function is complete; let’s use it to show the user
their score in an Alert view.
Showing the user’s score in an
Alert view
To create an Alert view, we first need a state variable to keep track of the
alert and trigger it when the state value changes. At the top of the file,
underneath the other variables we created, add the following State
variable:
//user feedback variable
If selectedPickerIndex is 0, then calculatedDifference is the
square root of easyDifference
If selectedPickerIndex is 1, then calculatedDifference is the
square root of hardDifference
If selectedPickerIndex is 2, then calculatedDifference is the
square root of extremeDifference
If selectedPickerIndex is any other value, then
calculatedDifference is set to 0.0

--- Page 533 ---
    @State var showAlert = false
Then, we need to add the Alert modifier after the Button code’s closing
brace:
.alert(isPresented: $showAlert) { () -> Alert in
        Alert(title: Text("Your Score"), message: 
          Text("\(calculateScore())"),
              primaryButton: Alert.Button.default(Text("New
                Game?"), action: {
            // Start a new game?
        }),
              secondaryButton: 
                Alert.Button.destructive(Text("Continue 
                  Playing"), action: {
            // Continue with the present game
           
        }))
    }
The code creates a title, a message, and two buttons – a primary button and
a secondary button.
The title will be the message to the user, and the message will be the user’s
score. We’re doing that by calling the calculatedScore function inside a
Text view using string interpolation; remember, the calculateScore
function returns an integer, and that value will be shown to the user as their
current score.
Then, the primary button will prompt the user to start a new game, while
the secondary button will prompt the user to continue playing.
To trigger the alert, we need to toggle the showAlert variable to true inside
the Button body, like this:
    Button(action: {
                showAlert = true
            }) {

--- Page 534 ---
Now, we can try the game out. Slide the sliders and try to get as close to the
target circle color as you can, then press the Check Score button to see
your score:

--- Page 536 ---
Figure 14.8: Alert view showing the user’s score
From this screen, if the user presses Continue Playing?, the game will
continue from where it left off. However, if they press New Game?,
nothing will happen – that’s because we haven’t added any logic to start a
new game yet. Let’s do that next.
Resetting the game
We want to give the user the opportunity to start a new game, and we can
do that by adding a reset function to the file. This function will reset the
sliders to 0 and generate another random target color for the middle target
circle.
Add the following function underneath the calculateScore function:
 //MARK: - RESET THE GAME
    func reset() {
        redTarget = Double.random(in: 0..<1)
        greenTarget = Double.random(in: 0..<1)
        blueTarget = Double.random(in: 0..<1)
        redGuess = 0.0
        greenGuess = 0.0
        blueGuess = 0.0
    }
This function creates new random colors and stores them in the Target
variables. It also resets the Guess variables back to 0, which will move all
the sliders back to their starting points on the left.
Let’s call the reset function inside the Alert modifier’s secondary button,
like this:
.alert(isPresented: $showAlert) { () -> Alert in
  Alert(title: Text("Your Score"), message:
    Text("\(calculateScore())"),
        primaryButton: Alert.Button.default(Text("Continue
          Playing?"), action: {
                }),

--- Page 537 ---
        secondaryButton: Alert.Button.destructive(Text("New 
          Game?"), action: {
      // Start a new game?
      reset()
  }))
Now, when we press the secondary button, New Game?, a new game starts
with a new target color, and the sliders are set back to their starting position:
Figure 14.9: Starting a new game

--- Page 538 ---
The sliders are set back to zero, and a new random target color is generated
and shown.
Let’s finish this project by adding two more things – a background, and a
confetti animation that will appear when the user gets a perfect score of
100.
Adding a background
First, the background. You can find the resource for this project in the
Chapter 14 folder on GitHub (it’s the only asset in the folder); just drag
and drop the background image file into the Asset Catalog. After you’ve
done that, add the following code in ContentView, after the closing brace of
the main VStack, like this:
.background(Image("background").resizable().edgesIgnoringSa
  feArea(.all))
Here, we are using the background modifier, passing the name of the
image, resizing it, and setting edgesIgnoringSafeArea to stretch it out
throughout the whole screen. It’s a subtle background, but it has a nice
pattern to it that I think works as a backdrop for the colorful UI:

--- Page 540 ---
Figure 14.10: Background added
Now, let’s look at Swift packages, and how to make some confetti.
Adding confetti using Swift
packages
A Swift package is pre-built software that we can use in any of our projects,
in which all the coding work has been done for us; all we have to do is
configure it in our project.
To add a Swift package, in Xcode, go to the File menu and select Add
Packages…:

--- Page 542 ---
Figure 14.11: Add Packages…
In the All Sources window, enter
https://github.com/simibac/ConfettiSwiftUI.git in the search box:
Figure 14.12: Adding the URL
When the Add Package button is clicked, Xcode will add the Confetti
package to the project. The Confetti package contains all the code needed to
create all kinds of confetti, dispersed in different ways.
Now, we need to import the Confetti framework into the ContentView file
at the top:
import ConfettiSwiftUI
Next, we need a variable that can trigger the confetti (placed after the other
project variables):
//confetti variable
    @State var counter = 0

--- Page 543 ---
Now, we can call the confettiCannon initializer in ContentView just after
the target and guess rectangle code, like this:
//MARK: - CONFETTI CANNON
    .confettiCannon(counter: $counter, num: 100, colors: 
      [.pink, .red, .blue, .purple, .orange], rainHeight: 
      1800.0, radius: 500.0)
This code calls the confettiCannon initializer, using the counter variable
to trigger the animation. The number of pieces of confetti being created will
be 100, and the colors array lets you add the colors that you want the
confetti to be. rainHeight will set how high the confetti goes upward, and
the radius will set how wide the confetti spreads.
Note
I filled out the variables for our example; however, you can play around
with these values and configure them the way you like. There are many
parameters that the creator, Simon Bachmann, has built into the
confettiCannon initializer, so it’s very customizable. For a full list, follow
this link: https://github.com/simibac/ConfettiSwiftUI#parameters.
Finally, we want to trigger the confetti in the Button body only when the
user scores a perfect 100. So, add the following code into the Button body,
right after the showAlert variable is set to true, and then we can test out
the animation:
 Button(action: {
        showAlert = true
        //if a score of 100 is achieved, make the confetti 
          fall by adding 1 to the counter variable
        if calculateScore() == 100 {
               counter += 1
                     }
This is just a simple if statement that checks whether the calculateScore
function returns 100. If so, we add 1 to the counter variable, which will
trigger the animation.

--- Page 544 ---
And if you’re wondering how adding a value of 1 triggers the confetti
cannon, well, that’s how the Confetti package is configured –when a value
of 1 is added to its counter variable, it triggers the confetti.
Okay, now when the user gets a score of 100, the confetti cannon will shoot
the confetti from the middle of the screen upward, and the confetti will
slowly rain down the entire interface, all the way past the bottom of the
screen:

--- Page 546 ---
Figure 14.13: Confetti animation
And that’s the color-matching game finished.
Summary
In this project, we learned about RGB colors, switch statements,
implementing a Picker view, adding a Slider view, and creating a reset
function, as well as using Swift packages to import pre-built code into our
project.
Play around with the code, and think of ways that you can take the game
further. For example, maybe you want to play a sound effect when a perfect
score is reached, such as a “pop” sound, or maybe you want to display the
score on a label in the UI rather than having to click a button to check it.
There are many different things that you can do to add more fun to the
project.
The next chapter will look at some advanced animations we can create by
integrating the SpriteKit framework into our SwiftUI projects. SpriteKit
gives us a particle system that creates all kinds of very realistic effects and
animations that you can use in your projects.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 547 ---
Integrating SpriteKit into Your
SwiftUI Projects
In this chapter, we will dive deeper into the world of animation in SwiftUI
and create some mini-projects, highlighting different animations that can be
made using other techniques and the SpriteKit framework. Some of the
animations will be simpler, some will be more complex, and some will be
dynamic and interactive animations too.
You will learn how to take advantage of the power of SpriteKit and
particle emitters. SpriteKit is a game development framework that
provides a convenient and efficient way to create 2D games for iOS and
macOS platforms. Particle emitters, on the other hand, are powerful tools in
the SpriteKit framework that allow you to create special effects such as fire,
smoke, rain, wind, explosions, and more. These emitters will bring life to
your apps, making them visually stunning and engaging for users.
So, here are the topics we will cover in this final chapter:
Technical requirements
You can find the completed projects and their code in the Chapter 15 folder
on GitHub: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Animating-SwiftUI-
Applications.
Animating pipe smoke
Animating coffee steam
Animating rocket fire
Animating a blizzard
Animating rain
Animating a magic wand

--- Page 548 ---
Animating pipe smoke
In this project, we will create a smoke effect using SpriteKit’s Smoke
template, and make it come out of an image of a pipe. This is a good first
project, as it’s not too complicated and gets you familiar with creating the
needed SpriteKit Scene (SKS) particle file and how to configure it.
Let’s get started, first create a new SwiftUI project, and call it Pipe Smoke.
We are going to need a couple of images for this project so you can grab
them over at GitHub (Chapter 15 | Pipe Smoke) and add them to the
project’s Assets catalog. Now it’s time to create a SpriteKit particle file.
Creating a SpriteKit particle file
Next, let’s create a new file; this will be a SpriteKit particle file. The
SpriteKit Scene (SKS) particle file is a scene file that has information
about the particle system it contains, such as the shape, size, and position of
the particle emitter, as well as the type of particles that will be emitted, their
behavior, and movements.
To create an SKS particle file, in Xcode, you simply need to go to File |
New | File | SpriteKit Particle File, or press Command + N to bring up the
template options, and scroll down until you come to a template called
SpriteKit Particle File.
Now, we need to choose the type of template we want. There are several
options and we’re going to explore them individually in separate projects,
but the one we want now is Smoke:

--- Page 549 ---
Figure 15.1: Particle template options
Once you click Next, name the file Smoke, choose a save location, and then
click Create:

--- Page 550 ---
Figure 15.2: Creating the Smoke.sks file
Now, you will see a new particle file in your Xcode editor that has a smoke
animation playing. That’s because we chose the Smoke template, so the
particles are pre-configured to produce smoke. This smoke will need to be
adjusted so it’s not as wide and thick. We want the effect to be thin and
small enough that we can make it come out of a pipe.
To configure the smoke, go to the right side of Xcode and you’ll see four
buttons; if you click on the fourth button, you open up the Attributes panel,
which is where we can configure our particle file to create an infinite
number of effects:

--- Page 552 ---
Figure 15.3: Xcode’s Attributes panel
There are quite a few settings in this panel, and since we will be creating
different particle files in this chapter, it’s a good idea to have an
understanding of what each field does. So, I will explain each field in order
for you to create this first project in the chapter, and you can use these
definitions for reference as you continue working through the other
projects.
Name
The Name field is used to give a unique identifier to the particle emitter so
that you can easily reference it within your code or in the editor. The field is
a string value that you can set to anything you like, as long as it’s unique
within the file. By giving your particle emitters descriptive names, they will
act as a reminder of what they do and how they’re used in your project.
Additionally, you can use the Name field to access the particle emitter and
modify its properties programmatically in your code.
Background
The Background field lets you set the background color of the editor.
Sometimes, it’s useful to adjust this color to help make the particles stand
out more.
Texture
The Texture field is used to specify the image file that will be used as the
particle texture. The particle texture is essentially the appearance of the
particles, and you can use any image file you like to create a wide range of
particle effects. For example, you could use a simple dot or circle image for
a simple particle effect, or a more complex image with multiple shapes and
colors for a more elaborate effect. When you specify a particle texture in the

--- Page 553 ---
Attributes panel, it will be used for all of the particles in the particle
emitter.
Emitter
Emitter is the object that defines the characteristics of a particle, such as its
initial position, speed, and lifetime.
The Emitter Birthrate field specifies the number of particles that are
emitted per second. It determines how quickly the particles will be
generated by the emitter – a higher birthrate will result in more particles
being emitted in a shorter amount of time, while a lower birthrate will result
in fewer particles being emitted over a longer period of time.
The Emitter Maximum field sets the maximum number of particles that
can exist at one time in the particle system. If Birthrate is set to a high
value and Maximum is set to a low value, the emitter will emit particles at
the specified rate until the maximum limit is reached. Once the maximum
number of particles has been reached, the emitter will stop emitting new
particles until some of the existing particles have disappeared. This allows
you to control the overall number of particles in your particle system and
optimize performance.
Lifetime
The Lifetime fields specify the amount of time that each particle in a
particle system will be active before it disappears.
The Lifetime Start field specifies the length of time for which each particle
will exist in the particle system. It determines how long each particle will
stay visible in the scene before disappearing. A higher value will result in
particles staying visible for a longer period of time, while a lower value will
result in particles disappearing more quickly.
The Lifetime Range field sets the range of values that the Lifetime
property can take. Instead of specifying a fixed value for the lifetime, you

--- Page 554 ---
can specify a range of values, and the particle system will randomly choose
a value from that range for each particle that is emitted. This allows you to
add variation to your particle system, making it look more organic and
natural. For example, if you set Lifetime Start to 1.0 and Lifetime Range
to 0.5, each particle’s lifetime will be a random value between 0.5 and 1.5
seconds.
Position Range
The Position Range fields specify the range of values for the initial
position of the particles in each dimension – X, Y, and Z – allowing you to
create particle systems that emit particles from a random position within a
defined area. The particle system will randomly choose a position from
within the specified range for each particle that is emitted, which can help
add variety and realism to your particle systems.
Angle
The Angle fields in an SKS particle file control the initial direction and
spread of particles when they are emitted. Angle Start sets the starting
direction of the particles, while Angle Range determines the range of
possible directions; the system then randomly chooses an angle within the
range for each particle emitted. Angle Start is measured in degrees, with 0
degrees pointing to the right, and Angle Range specifies the spread of
angles in a counterclockwise direction, again measured in degrees.
Speed
The Speed fields control the initial speed and variation of particles when
emitted in an SKS particle file. Speed Start sets the starting speed, while
Speed Range specifies the possible range of speeds; a random speed is then
chosen within the specified range for each emitted particle.

--- Page 555 ---
Adjusting these fields allows you to create various particle effects, with a
higher value resulting in faster particles and a lower value in slower
particles. For example, setting Speed Start to 100 and Speed Range to 0
will emit particles at a constant speed, while setting Speed Start to 50 and
Speed Range to 25 will create particles with varying speeds between 25
and 75. These values are generally understood to be points per second.
Acceleration
The Acceleration X and Acceleration Y fields control the acceleration of
the particles in the x and y directions respectively. For example, you could
set Acceleration X to 0 and Acceleration Y to -100 to create a particle
system that is affected by gravity, causing the particles to fall downward.
Alternatively, you could set Acceleration X to 50 and Acceleration Y to 0
to create a particle system that moves to the right at a constant rate.
The Acceleration X and Acceleration Y fields are specified in points per
second squared; positive values will cause the particles to accelerate in the
positive direction, while negative values will cause the particles to
decelerate or accelerate in the opposite direction.
Alpha
Alpha in an .sks file refers to the opacity or transparency of particles in a
particle system. The alpha value controls how much of the particle is
visible, with a higher value making the particle more visible and a lower
value making the particle more transparent.
The Alpha Start field specifies the starting alpha value for the particles,
which can be used to control their initial transparency. The Alpha Range
field specifies the range of possible alpha values that the particles can take,
and when the particle emitter emits a particle, it will choose a random alpha
value within the specified range. The Alpha Speed field specifies the rate at
which the alpha value of the particles will change over time, and can be
used to control the rate of fade-in or fade-out of the particles; a positive

--- Page 556 ---
value for this field will cause the particles to fade in over time, while a
negative value will cause the particles to fade out over time.
By adjusting the Alpha Start, Alpha Range, and Alpha Speed fields, you
can control the transparency of the particles over their lifetime and create a
wide range of particle effects. For example, you could set Alpha Start to 1
and Alpha Range to 0 to emit particles with a constant alpha value or set
Alpha Start to 1, Alpha Range to 0, and Alpha Speed to -0.5 to emit
particles that fade out over time.
Scale
The Scale fields control the size of the particles over their lifetime. The
Scale Start field specifies the starting size of the particles, which can be
used to control their initial size. The Scale Range field specifies the range
of possible sizes that the particles can take, and when the particle emitter
emits a particle, it will choose a random size within the specified range. The
Scale Speed field specifies the rate at which the size of the particles will
change over time, and can be used to control the rate of growth or shrinkage
of the particles; a positive value for this will cause the particles to grow
over time, while a negative value will cause the particles to shrink over
time.
As an example of using Scale, you could set Scale Start to 1 and Scale
Range to 0 to emit particles with a constant size or set Scale Start to 1,
Scale Range to 0.5, and Scale Speed to 0.1 to emit particles that grow over
time.
Rotation
The Rotation Start field specifies the starting rotation of the particles,
which can be used to control their initial orientation. The Rotation Range
field specifies the range of possible rotations that the particles can take, and
when the particle emitter emits a particle, it will choose a random rotation
within the specified range. The Rotation Speed field specifies the rate at
which the rotation of the particles will change over time, and can be used to

--- Page 557 ---
control the rate of rotation of the particles; a positive value will cause the
particles to rotate clockwise, while a negative value will cause the particles
to rotate counterclockwise.
You could set Rotation Start to 0 and Rotation Range to 0 to emit
particles with a constant orientation or set Rotation Start to 0, Rotation
Range to 180, and Rotation Speed to 180 to emit particles that rotate
rapidly over time.
Color Blend
The Color Blend fields control the color of the particles over their lifetime.
The Color Blend Factor field specifies the amount of color blending that
will be applied to the particles. When the particle emitter emits a particle, it
will choose a random color blend factor within the specified range. The
particle’s color will be blended with the color of the particle’s texture
according to this blend factor.
The Color Blend Factor Range field specifies the range of possible color
blend factors that the particles can take. A value of 0 will result in no color
blending, while a value of 1 will result in full color blending.
The Color Blend Factor Speed field specifies the rate at which the color
blend factor of the particles will change over time, and can be used to
control the rate at which the particles’ color will change. A positive value
for the Color Blend Factor Speed field will cause the color of the particles
to change over time, while a negative value will cause the color of the
particles to change in reverse.
Looking an example, you could set Color Blend Factor to 0, Color Blend
Factor Range to 0, and Color Blend Factor Speed to 0 to emit particles
with constant color, or set Color Blend Factor to 1, Color Blend Factor
Range to 1, and Color Blend Factor Speed to 0.1 to emit particles that
change color rapidly over time.

--- Page 558 ---
Color Ramp
The Color Ramp field is used to specify a range of colors that particles can
take on over their lifetime. The colors are defined using a ramp, which is a
gradient that blends two or more colors.
Color Ramp allows you to create particle effects with changing colors. By
default, particles will be emitted with a single color, but by adjusting Color
Ramp, you can set the particles to a fixed range of colors, change color
over time, or randomize the color within a range. For example, you could
set Color Ramp to shades of red and yellow to create a fire effect or shades
of blue and white for a snow effect.
Additionally, Color Ramp can be used to create different blending modes,
such as additive or subtractive blending. The blending mode determines
how the colors of the particles are combined with the colors of the
background or other particles in the scene.
Blend Mode
Blending is a process that combines the colors of the particles with the
colors of the objects behind them on the screen. The Blend Mode field
determines how the colors of the particles and the background will be
combined.
There are several blend modes available in SpriteKit, the choice of which
depends on the desired visual effect for the particles. For example, the
Alpha blend mode will blend the colors of the particles and the background
by taking the alpha channel of the particle’s color into account. The Add
blend mode will add the colors of the particles and the background together.
The Multiply blend mode will multiply the colors of the particles and the
background together.
By adjusting the blend mode, you can control how the colors of the
particles are blended with the colors of the objects behind them and create a
wide range of particle effects.

--- Page 559 ---
Field Mask
Field Mask takes an integer value that is used to specify a masking bit-
field, and the bit-field defines which properties of the particle are affected
by the mask. For example, if the bit-field includes the position bit, the mask
will affect the position of the particles. If it includes the color bit, the mask
will affect the color of the particles. By setting the value of Field Mask,
you can control which properties of the particles are affected by the mask.
This allows you to create complex and sophisticated particle effects.
For example, you could set Field Mask to include the position bit, which
would cause the mask to affect the position of the particles, and create
particles that follow a specific path or shape. Otherwise, you could set Field
Mask to include the color bit, which would cause the mask to affect the
color of the particles, and create particles with a specific color scheme or
pattern.
Custom Shader
The Custom Shader field allows you to specify a custom shader to be used
to render the particles.
A shader is a program that runs on the GPU and is used to define the
appearance and behavior of the particles. By using a custom shader, you can
create complex and sophisticated particle effects that would be difficult or
impossible to achieve using the built-in properties of the particle emitter.
For example, you could use a custom shader to create particles that respond
to changes in the environment, such as light or shadows, or create particles
that change shape or appearance over time. To use one, you need to write
the shader code in a language such as OpenGL Shading Language
(GLSL) and then specify the shader code as the value of the Custom
Shader field. Once you have specified the custom shader, SpriteKit will use
it to render the particles, giving you complete control over the appearance
and behavior of the particles. By combining custom shaders with other
properties of the particle emitter, such as Birthrate, Lifetime, and Position

--- Page 560 ---
Range, you can create a wide range of sophisticated and visually stunning
particle effects.
Now, we have looked at all of the customization fields for the particle
system. I know it can be a bit overwhelming, which is why I defined each
field in the file so you can refer to it when you’re building your particle
system.
Let’s use the following values to alter the smoke so it is similar to the
smoke that you would see coming from a pipe. I have worked out all the
values; you just need to fill them in:

--- Page 562 ---
Figure 15.4: Attributes for the pipe smoke animation
Make sure your file has those same values as well before proceeding, which
will give you the correct smoke you need to come out of the pipe.
Integrating the Smoke file into a
SwiftUI View
Before we get started with this section, a little bit of explanation is needed
as to what the SpriteKit framework is all about and how it works. As I
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, SpriteKit is a game development
framework that provides a convenient and efficient way to create 2D games
for iOS and macOS platforms. Using the SpriteKit framework, you can
create different sprites for your animation or game.
A sprite is represented by the SKSpriteNode class, which is a node that can
display a textured image. A sprite can be thought of as a single frame of an
animation and it can be moved, rotated, and scaled and have physics
applied to it. A single sprite can also have multiple textures, allowing it to
change appearance. In a game, sprites are used to represent characters,
objects, and backgrounds.
You can create a sprite by initializing SKSpriteNode with an image or
texture and then adding it to an SKScene. Once added to a scene, a sprite
can be manipulated using various properties and methods, such as position,
scale, and rotation, and you can also add actions, physics, and gestures to it.
SKView is a UIView subclass that is used to display and interact with
SpriteKit scenes. It acts as the container for an SKScene and provides the
necessary infrastructure for displaying and animating sprites. An SKScene is
a container for all the sprites in a SpriteKit-based project. It is responsible
for updating and rendering the sprites, and also provides a way to handle
user interactions with the sprites. A scene can also contain other nodes such
as labels and shapes in addition to sprites. Each scene can have its own set
of sprites, physics, and interactions. You will become more familiar with
sprites and nodes as we progress through the projects in this chapter.

--- Page 563 ---
Let’s do some coding now. Go into ContentView, and we will create a
smoke view struct in which we can use our Smoke.sks file. The first thing
we need to do is import the SpriteKit framework so that we have access to
the classes and methods. Add this line of code at the top of ContentView:
import SpriteKit
Now, let’s create that SmokeView struct I mentioned by adding this under the
ContentView struct:
struct SmokeView: UIViewRepresentable {
    func makeUIView(context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<SmokeView>) -> SKView {
        let view = SKView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 
          400, height: 400))
        view.backgroundColor = .clear
        let scene = SKScene(size: CGSize(width: 400, 
          height: 600))
        ///set the scenes background color to clear because 
          we will set the color in the ContentView.
        ///You can also use any other valid color like 
          UIColor.lightGray, UIColor.green, 
          UIColor.init(red: 1, green: 1, blue: 1, alpha: 
          0.5) or any other UIColor initializer.
        scene.backgroundColor = UIColor.clear
        guard let smoke = SKEmitterNode(fileNamed: 
          "Smoke.sks") else { return SKView() }
        smoke.position = CGPoint(x: scene.size.width / 2, 
          y: scene.size.height / 2)
        // set the blend mode - scale - range
        smoke.particleBlendMode = .screen
        smoke.particleScale = 0.01
        smoke.particleScaleRange = 0.05
        ///add the smoke to the scene
        scene.addChild(smoke)
        view.presentScene(scene)
        return view
    }
    func updateUIView(_ uiView: SKView, context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<SmokeView>) {
      /// Update the smoke in this function if you need to
    }
}

--- Page 564 ---
Here’s how the SmokeView struct works, line by line. Bear in mind that the
SpriteKit framework uses methods and classes we have not used before, so
the code may seem unfamiliar at first; as you work through the chapter
though, you will understand it very quickly because it is Swift code after
all, and is very readable:
This code starts off by defining a struct named SmokeView, which is
used to display the smoke effect that we configured in the Smoke.sks
file. The struct conforms to the UIViewRepresentable protocol. This
allows the struct to be used as a SwiftUI view.
Next, we add the makeUIView method, which is required by the
UIViewRepresentable protocol. It creates and returns SKView, which is
used to display the smoke effect.
Then, we create an instance of SKView with a specified frame (size and
position). This frame is used to determine the size of the smoke effect.
We set the backgroundColor property of the SKView instance to clear.
This means that the background of the view will be transparent and will
not have a solid color background; this way, any underlying views or
graphics can show through.
We create an instance of SKScene with a specified size property,
which determines the size of the smoke effect, and a background color
value of clear so that the background of the smoke effect will be
transparent.
Next, we create an instance of SKEmitterNode using the particle
system defined in the Smoke.sks file. The guard let statement is used
to check whether the file was loaded correctly and if not, it returns an
empty SKView.
Then, we position the smoke effect in the center of the scene; set the
blend mode to SKBlendMode.screen, which will make the smoke blend
with the background; set the initial scale of the smoke particles, which
will make the particles smaller and thinner; and set the range of the
scale of the smoke particles.
The addChild method is called on the scene instance, passing in the
smoke node as an argument. This adds the particle emitter node as a

--- Page 565 ---
To summarize, the code creates and returns an SKView instance that displays
a SpriteKit particle emitter as a SwiftUI view. Now, we have a SmokeView
ready to go and display the smoke.
Let’s come into ContentView and add a background for the scene, and a
smiley image that has a pipe in his mouth. Then, we will call the SmokeView
we just created to put the smoke into the pipe. To do this, modify
ContentView like so:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            ///adding the pipe image and setting the size 
              and scale to fit on it
            Image("pipe")
                .resizable().frame(width: 350, height: 350)
                .scaledToFit()
            ///calling and positioning the SmokeView
            SmokeView()
            .offset(x: -140, y: 105)
        }.background(Image("background"))
    }
}
What we have done here is create a ZStack and put our image of the smiley,
which is called pipe, into the scene. Then, we resized it with width and
height values of 350 points and called our SmokeView.
child node to the scene, meaning it will be displayed in the scene.
The presentScene method is called on the view instance, passing in
the scene instance as an argument. This sets the scene as the currently
displayed scene in the view.
Then, the return keyword returns the view instance.
The updateUIView function is called when the view needs to be
updated, such as when the view’s state changes. In this code, we leave it
empty, as it is not needed in our example.

--- Page 566 ---
Next, we positioned the smoke so that it is directly above the pipe and
appears to come out of the pipe, achieved with the offset modifier. Finally,
we add the background right onto the ZStack, and the project is finished.
If you run the project, you’ll see realistic pipe smoke coming out of the
pipe:

--- Page 568 ---
Figure 15.5: The pipe smoke animation
Now that you know how to create smoke and have a basic foundation of
how to get the SpriteKit particle system operational in our SwiftUI project,
let’s continue and solidify what you know and use the Smoke template once
again, but vary the values to create a different effect.
Animating coffee steam
In this next project, we’ll modify the particle system file to create steam
that we can use to create a steaming cup of coffee animation. Well also look
at a technique where we can place the steam directly inside the coffee by
overlapping images. To get started, create a new project and call it Coffee,
and then we’ll move on to creating the SpriteKit particle file.
Creating the Smoke SpriteKit particle
file
To create the file, like before, press Command + N, choose the SpriteKit
Particle File template, and let’s pick Smoke from the particle template
options again (yes, Smoke again, but we will make it look like steam this
time).
Now, we will modify the various properties to create our animation. Change
all the properties in your SKS file to look like the following figure:

--- Page 570 ---
Figure 15.6: The attributes of the coffee steam animation
All of those properties have been explained in the previous project. If
you’re unclear as to what each one does, revisit that section for a refresher.
Creating the Coffee Steam struct
Next, let’s go back into the ContentView file and we’ll start assembling the
project. In the previous project, we learned how to use the .sks file inside
the SwiftUI view, and we’re going to do almost the exact same thing here
too. The first thing we did was create a separate struct and use the
UIViewRepresentable protocol to use the .sks file within a SwiftUI view.
So, in this project, underneath ContentView, add the following struct:
struct CoffeeSteam: UIViewRepresentable {
    func makeUIView(context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<CoffeeSteam>) -> SKView {
        let view = SKView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 
          400, height: 400))
        view.backgroundColor = .clear
        let scene = SKScene(size: CGSize(width: 400, 
          height: 600))
        ///set the scenes background color to clear - we 
          only want the particles seen
        scene.backgroundColor = UIColor.clear
        guard let steam = SKEmitterNode(fileNamed: 
          "CoffeeSteam.sks") else { return SKView() }
        steam.position = CGPoint(x: scene.size.width / 2, 
          y: scene.size.height / 2)
        /// set the blend mode - scale - range
        steam.particleBlendMode = .screen
        steam.particleScale = 0.01
        steam.particleScaleRange = 0.05
        ///add the smoke to the scene
        scene.addChild(steam)
        view.presentScene(scene)
        return view
    }
    func updateUIView(_ uiView: SKView, context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<CoffeeSteam>) {
      /// Update the steam in this function if you need to

--- Page 571 ---
    }
}
I explained this code in the previous project, but I will go over it again to
help solidify your understanding:
The code starts off by defining a custom SwiftUI view named
CoffeeSteam, which is used to display the steam effect that we
configured in the CoffeeSteam.sks file. The struct conforms to the
UIViewRepresentable protocol. This allows the struct to be used as a
SwiftUI view.
Next, we add the makeUIView method, which is required by the
UIViewRepresentable protocol. It creates and returns an SKView, which
is used to display the steam effect.
We create an instance of SKView with a specified frame (size and
position). This frame is used to determine the size of the steam effect.
We set the backgroundColor property of the SKView instance to clear.
This means that the background of the view will be transparent and will
not have a solid color background; this way, any underlying views or
graphics can show through.
Then, we create an instance of SKScene with a specified size, which is
used to determine the size of the steam effect, and set the background
color to clear; this way, the background of the steam effect will be
transparent too.
Next, we create an instance of SKEmitterNode using the particle
system defined in the CoffeeSteam.sks file. The guard let statement is
used to check whether the file was loaded correctly and if not, it returns
an empty SKView.
Then, we position the steam in the center of the scene; set the blend
mode of the steam to SKBlendMode.screen, which will help to make the
steam blend in with the background; set the initial scale of the steam
particles to help them resemble a steam effect; then, we set the range of
the scale of the smoke particles. (Again, refer to the previous project
where I defined each of these property fields in the SKS file).

--- Page 572 ---
So, all that code creates and returns an SKView instance that displays a
SpriteKit particle emitter as a SwiftUI view. Noticed that I am setting some
of the properties in code here? You have the option of setting the properties
in the SKS file by adjusting the values there, or you can set them in code
here; however, remember that when you set them in code, they override
anything you set in the SKS file.
Filling out ContentView
Now, we can just do a little work in ContentView and display the steaming
cup of coffee. If you haven’t already done so, drop the assets into the Asset
Catalog that you can find in the Chapter 15 folder titled Coffee Steam on
GitHub.
Let’s modify ContentView to look like the following:
struct ContentView: View {
  var body: some View {
    ZStack {
        Image("background")
            .resizable().frame(width: 600, height: 900)
            .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        ZStack {
            ///adding the whole cup
            Image("cup")
                .resizable().frame(width: 350, height: 300)
The addChild method is called on the scene instance, passing in the
steam node as an argument. This adds the particle emitter node as a
child node to the scene, meaning it will be displayed in the scene.
The presentScene method is called on the view instance, passing in
the scene instance as an argument. This sets the scene as the currently
displayed scene in the view.
Then, the return keyword returns the view instance.
The updateUIView function is called when the view needs to be
updated, such as when the view’s state changes. In this code, we leave it
empty, as it is not needed in our example.

--- Page 573 ---
                .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
            ///calling and positioning the SmokeView
            CoffeeSteam().offset(x: 15, y: 80)
            ///adding the altered cup
            Image("cup 2")
                .resizable().frame(width: 350, height: 300)
                .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
        }.offset(y: 250)
    }
  }
}
The code declares a ZStack that will hold our views. Inside ZStack, we add
a background image, resize it, and set the aspect ratio on it.
Then, the code declares another ZStack, where we placed the first image
titled cup, resizing it and setting its aspect ratio as well.
Next, we called the CoffeeSteam struct and offset it a little bit so it’s
centered in the middle of the cup.
And after that, we added the cup 2 image. This second image is used to
make the steam appear as though it’s coming out of the center of the cup.
So, what we’re essentially doing is sandwiching the animating steam in
between two coffee cup images, in which one of the cup images has a little
cut out in it; when we place the steam in between these two, we can create a
nice steaming effect that appears to be originating from inside the coffee
cup.
Finally, I called the offset modifier on the ZStack to position everything
on the y-axis.
Now, run the project and you will see the steaming effect that’s coming
right off the surface of the coffee. Also notice how the back of the cup
glistens with the steam as it rises, as it would do in a real cup of coffee.

--- Page 575 ---
Figure 15.7: A cup of steaming coffee
Now, we have completed two projects using the Smoke particle template –
creating pipe smoke and coffee steam – and we understand how to
manipulate the particles in very different ways. Let’s continue and move on
to the next project, where we’ll use a different particle system: fire.
Animating rocket fire
The SpriteKit Fire particle template generates particles that are typically
colored shades of orange, yellow, and red, which give the impression of
glowing embers and flames. The particles may also have a slight degree of
transparency to mimic the flickering and shifting quality of a real fire. In
terms of behavior, the particles are designed to move upward with a certain
amount of randomness, representing the movement of hot air and flames.
Rather than creating some simple flames, though, we’re going to animate a
rocket!
Press Command + N, then choose the SpriteKit Particle File template.
After that, pick the Fire particle template and name the file Rocket. Xcode
will go ahead and create the fire particles that you can see them running in
the editor.
Now, let’s create the SwiftUI view that will bring this .sks file into our
SwiftUI project.
Adding FireView
To create the view, press Command + N and make a SwiftUIView file.
Then, call it FireView. Then, import SpriteKit, and add the following code
at the top of the file:
struct FireView: UIViewRepresentable {
    func makeUIView(context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<FireView>) -> SKView {
        let view = SKView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 

--- Page 576 ---
          400, height: 400))
        view.backgroundColor = .clear
        scene.backgroundColor = UIColor.clear
        guard let fire = SKEmitterNode(fileNamed: 
          "Fire.sks") else { return SKView() }
        fire.position = CGPoint(x: scene.size.width / 2, y: 
          scene.size.height / 2)
        ///use the particlePositionRange property to 
          constrain the fire particles so they are not so 
          wide and can fit under the rockets exhaust
        fire.particlePositionRange = CGVector(dx: 5, dy: 0)
        ///add the fire to the scene
        scene.addChild(fire)
        view.presentScene(scene)
        return view
    }
    func updateUIView(_ uiView: SKView, context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<FireView>) {
        /// Update the fire in this function if you need to
    }
}
I’m not going to go over this code because we have done this already, but
you can refer back to the previous SpriteKit projects for all the
explanations, and how we use the UIViewRepresentable protocol.
If you run a code in the previews, you’ll see that it works great and the fire
is the correct dimensions to fit under the rocket. However, notice that the
fire is upside down. Let’s look at how we can fix this so it looks like a
proper thrust to place underneath a rocket.
Adding RocketView
Let’s now create one more view that we can use to put together the rocket
and the fire, then rotate the fire around so it’s properly oriented under the
rocket. Press Command + N, create a new SwiftUI View file, and call it
RocketView. Then, add the following code inside the struct:
struct RocketView: View {
        @State private var rocketAndFireOffset: CGFloat = 0
        var body: some View {
            ZStack {

--- Page 577 ---
                FireView().rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: 
                  180.0)).offset(y: 60)
                     ///move the fire upwards by changing y 
                       offset
                    .offset(x: 0, y: -rocketAndFireOffset)
                    /// position the fire at the bottom 
                      center of the screen
                    .position(x: 
                      UIScreen.main.bounds.width/2, y: 
                      UIScreen.main.bounds.height)
                Image("rocket")
                    .resizable().aspectRatio(contentMode: 
                      .fit).frame(width: 100, height: 200)
                     ///move the rocket upwards by changing 
                       y offset
                    .offset(x: 0, y: -rocketAndFireOffset)
                    ///position the rocket at the bottom 
                      center of the screen
                    .position(x: 
                      UIScreen.main.bounds.width/2, y: 
                      UIScreen.main.bounds.height)
                ///rotate the fire and offset it so its 
                  under the bottom of the rocket
            } .animation(Animation.linear(duration: 
              8).repeatForever(autoreverses: false),value: 
              rocketAndFireOffset) // increase the duration 
              of the animation
                .onAppear {
                    rocketAndFireOffset = 
                      UIScreen.main.bounds.height * 1.3 // 
                      move the rocket off the top of the 
                      screen, by increasing the offset
            }
        }
    }
First, we create a rocketAndFire offset variable that we can use to move
both the rocket and the fire upward on the screen.
Then, inside the ZStack, we take FireView and rotate it 180°, and offset it
on the y-axis, which makes the fire extend further out from the rocket,
which we will add shortly. Then, we animate the fire upward by changing
the y-offset, and positioning the fire in the center of the screen on the x-
and y-axes using the UIScreen property.

--- Page 578 ---
Then, we can add the rocket image, resize it, and animate it upward by
offsetting the y-axis using the rocketAndFire variable. Next, we just need
to position the rocket in the center of the screen using the UIScreen
property.
Finally, we can add the animation to the closing brace of the ZStack, which
will act on both FireView and the rocket image. Let’s give it a duration of 8
seconds, and make it repeat forever with no auto-reverse.
Now, we can launch the rocket in the onAppear method by changing the
value of the rocketAndFire property. When the view appears, the rocket
will lift off and continue off the top of the screen and come back up from
the bottom and keep flying.
All we have to do now is add the background!
Putting things together inside
ContentView
Inside ContentView, we need very little code to get our rocket into space:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            ///add the RocketView to the scene
            RocketView()
        }.background(Image("background")
            .resizable()
            .scaledToFill().edgesIgnoringSafeArea(.all))
    }
}
And that’s it. Inside the ZStack, we added RocketView() to the scene, and
then we added the background image right onto ZStack.
Check it out in the previews and you’ll see that we now have a rocket flying
in space:

--- Page 580 ---
Figure 15.8: Our rocket blasting off
By leveraging the power of particle systems, we were able to create a
realistic and dynamic visual effect that brings our rocket to life. We
explored the various parameters and properties of the emitter to fine-tune
the look and feel of the thrust and learned how to integrate it with our
SwiftUI view.
Looking at another example, we’re going to return to another effect that
we’ve already seen before – snow – but modify it so it creates a blizzard-
like effect.
Animating a blizzard
In this next project, we’re going to create a blizzard scene, and add a wind
effect to make the snow blow from different directions. We will also use
that wind to make the branches of a tree blow as well, by combining images
and animating them. We created a snow scene in the breathing flower
project in Chapter 6, but this time, we’re going to create this snow scene
using a particle file, which gives us more options for making and
controlling the snow.
Let’s start by creating a new project and calling it Snow. Then, we will get
right to work creating the SKS file that we need for the snow – this time,
though, we’ll create two files.
Creating two Snow SpriteKit particle
files
For this project, we will create two SpriteKit files – both will be from the
Snow template, but we will use different values so the snow blows from
different directions and at different velocities.
To create the first file, press Command + N, choose the SpriteKit Particle
File template, choose Snow from the particle options, and save it as Snow.

--- Page 581 ---
Now, let’s configure the particle properties so we can create a nice heavy
snowfall. Use the same values from the following figure:

--- Page 583 ---
Figure 15.9: The attributes for the Snow file
And that creates the desired snowfall we are going for. To help you in
designing your unique snowfall, the following is a guide for making
adjustments:
If you look at that snow in the editor, you can see that it has a pretty heavy
effect, just what we need for our scene. Now, let’s create the second file
with different values for the snow; we’ll then combine both of these SKS
files into one SwiftUI view that we can use to create a nice blizzard effect.
Follow the same steps to create a second file, but this time, call it Blustery.
Now, let’s alter the attributes to the following values:
Particle Lifetime: Set the lifetime to a relatively long time so that the
particles stay on the screen for a while
Particle Birthrate: Increase the birthrate to generate more particles
per second, which will create a denser snowfall effect
Particle Size: Increase the size of the particles to make them appear
larger and more prominent on the screen
Particle Speed: Decrease the speed of the particles to make them fall
slower and more gently
Particle Color: Change the color of the particles to white or light blue
to make them look more like snowflakes
Emitter Shape: Change the emitter shape to a rectangle or a line to
make the snowfall appear more natural
Emitter Position: Adjust the emitter’s position to start the snowfall
from the top of the screen

--- Page 585 ---
Figure 15.10: The attributes for the Blustery file
This new file has different Birthrate, Angle, and Acceleration values to
make the snow blow from different directions, as well as lift the snow up a
little bit as if being carried by the wind. When we combine the two SKS
files together, which will create a nice blizzard effect.
So, let’s do that now; we’ll need to create a struct in which you can put
these two files together.
Creating a view that combines the two
SKS files
Working inside the ContentView file, first, add the SpriteKit import. Then,
create a new struct called SnowView after the ContentView struct. (You
could create separate files and keep things neat in the project navigator, but
I’m just going to put the rest of the code into the ContentView file for this
project.)
With SnowView created, add the following code within it:
struct SnowView: UIViewRepresentable {
  func makeUIView(context: 
    UIViewRepresentableContext<SnowView>) -> SKView {
      let view = SKView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 
        400, height: 400))
      view.backgroundColor = .clear
      let scene = SKScene(size: CGSize(width: 500, 
        height: 800))
      scene.backgroundColor = UIColor.clear
      guard let snow = SKEmitterNode(fileNamed: 
        "Snow.sks") else { return SKView() }
      guard let blustery = SKEmitterNode(fileNamed: 
        "Blustery.sks") else { return SKView() }
      //snow sks file
      snow.position = CGPoint(x: scene.size.width / 2, y: 
        scene.size.height / 2)
      ///use the particlePositionRange property to spread 
        the snow particles on the screen for the x and y 
        axis

--- Page 586 ---
      snow.particlePositionRange = CGVector(dx: 500, dy: 
        900)
      //blustery sks file
      blustery.position = CGPoint(x: scene.size.width / 2, 
        y: scene.size.height / 2)
      ///use the particlePositionRange property to spread 
        the snow particles on the screen for the x and y 
        axis
      blustery.particlePositionRange = CGVector(dx: 500, 
        dy: 900)
      ///add the snow to the scene
      scene.addChild(snow)
      scene.addChild(blustery)
      view.presentScene(scene)
      return view
  }
  func updateUIView(_ uiView: SKView, context: 
    UIViewRepresentableContext<SnowView>) {
      /// Update the snow in this function if you need to
  }
}
The code positions both nodes, the snow node and the blustery node, using
the position property, and then sets the particlePositionRange property
on both as well. particlePositionRange is the range of allowed random
values for a particle’s position. Finally, as we’ve done with our other
particle files, we add them to the scene using the addChild function and
passing in the view that we want to add to the scene.
Now, we can call this struct in ContentView to check out the blizzard, and
in fact, let’s also add a background snow scene too:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            Image("background")
                .resizable().frame(width: 600, height: 900)
                .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
            SnowView()
        }
    }
}

--- Page 587 ---
Now, run the previews and check out the blizzard effect:

--- Page 589 ---
Figure 15.11: Our blizzard scene
Now, let’s continue with the project and add another animation to it. For
this one, we want to make the branches of the tree blow in the wind.
Animating the tree branches
To animate the tree branches, we’re going to wrap all the code up into
several ZStack. Then, we will use one image of a snowy branch, replicate it
many times with a ForEach loop, place the branch images over a portion of
the tree, and put rotation animations on each of the axes of those images.
We will also randomize the animation so that it doesn’t follow a set pattern.
Let’s start by creating the struct that we need to hold these views:
struct Branches: View {
 var body: some View {
     }
}
Next, let’s add the variables we need to keep track of the animations and set
some initial values:
   @State private var anglesX = [Double](repeating: 0, 
     count: 25)
    @State private var anglesY = [Double](repeating: 0, 
      count: 25)
    @State private var anglesZ = [Double](repeating: 0, 
      count: 25)
    @State private var positions = [CGPoint](repeating: 
      .zero, count: 25)
    @State private var durations = [Double](repeating: 0, 
      count: 25)
This code defines five state properties in a SwiftUI view.
The anglesX, anglesY, and anglesZ properties are arrays of Double values,
each with a length of 25. These arrays are used to store the rotation angles

--- Page 590 ---
around the x-, y-, and z-axes, respectively. The repeating: parameter is
used to initialize all the values in each array to 0.
The positions property is an array of CGPoint values, also with a length of
25. This array is used to store the positions of the views. The repeating:
parameter is used to initialize all the values in the array to the zero point,
(0, 0).
The durations property is an array of Double values, again with a length of
25. This array is used to store the durations of the animations associated
with each view. The repeating: parameter is used to initialize all the
values in the array to 0.
As we have seen, the @State property wrapper is used to make each of
these arrays a mutable state property of the view. This means that whenever
any of the arrays are modified, SwiftUI will automatically re-render the
view to reflect the changes.
Next, let’s move into the body property and add a ZStack that contains the
image we want to manipulate and reproduce, as well as the animation we’re
going to put on it:
ZStack {
    ForEach(0..<8) { index in
         Image("branch")
            .resizable()
            .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
            .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesX[index]))
            .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesY[index]), 
              anchor: .center)
            .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesZ[index]), 
              anchor: .center)
            .position(positions[index])
            .frame(width: 200, height: 700)
            .animation(
                Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                  durations[index])
                    .repeatForever(autoreverses: true), 
                      value: anglesX)
            .onAppear {
                anglesX[index] = Double.random(in: 2...4)
                anglesY[index] = Double.random(in: 2...3)

--- Page 591 ---
                anglesZ[index] = Double.random(in: 1...3)
                positions[index] = CGPoint(x: 
                  CGFloat.random(in: 0...10), y: 
                  CGFloat.random(in: 0...5))
                durations[index] = Double.random(in: 3...5)
            }
    }
} .offset(x: 50, y: 200)
Here’s what we’re doing in here. We start off with a ZStack so we can stack
our views on top of each other. Next is a ForEach loop, which iterates over
a range of integers from 0 to 7; the index parameter is used to access the
current iteration value in the loop.
Then, we add the branch image and the following modifiers:
The resizable modifier resizes the image.
The rotationEffect(_:) modifier is used to rotate the image around
the x-, y-, and z-axes. The angle of rotation is specified by the
corresponding value in the anglesX, anglesY, and anglesZ arrays,
respectively. The anchor parameter is used to specify the center of
rotation. In this case, .center is used for both the anglesY and anglesZ
rotations, so the image is rotated around its center point.
The position(_:) modifier is used to position the image on the
screen. The positions array stores the position for each image instance
based on its index.
The frame(width:height:) modifier sets the size of the image.
The animation(_:, value:) modifier is used to animate the rotation
of the image. The duration of the animation is based on the value stored
in the durations array, while the value parameter specifies that the
animation should be re-evaluated whenever the anglesX array changes.
The onAppear modifier is used to randomly generate new values for
the anglesX, anglesY, anglesZ positions, and durations arrays
whenever an image appears on the screen.
Finally, the offset modifier applies an offset of 50 points on the x-axis
and 200 points on the y-axis to the entire ZStack, which positions the

--- Page 592 ---
To summarize, what we’re doing is creating eight image views of snow-
covered branches, each with a different rotation, position, duration, and
animation. The views are stacked on top of each other within ZStack and
have an offset applied to place them in the tree.
Now, I’d like to replicate the ZStack several more times so we can cover
the whole tree with snowy branches, rather than covering only a portion of
the tree. So, we’ll make four more ZStacks but with slightly different values
to make the wind-blowing effect seem more random and natural:
ZStack {
    ForEach(0..<10) { index in
        Image("branch")
            .resizable()
            .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
            .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesX[index]))
            .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesY[index]), 
              anchor: .center)
            .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesZ[index]), 
              anchor: .center)
    .position(positions[index])
            .frame(width: 200, height: 700)
            .offset(x: 50, y: 200)
            .animation(
                Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                  durations[index])
                    .repeatForever(autoreverses: 
                      true),value: anglesY)
            .onAppear {
                anglesX[index] = Double.random(in: 3...4)
                anglesY[index] = Double.random(in: 2...5)
                anglesZ[index] = Double.random(in: 1...4)
                positions[index] = CGPoint(x: 
                  CGFloat.random(in: 0...10), y: 
                  CGFloat.random(in: 0...14))
                durations[index] = Double.random(in: 2...6)
            }
    }
}.offset(x: -80, y: -156)
  ZStack {
    ForEach(0..<15) { index in
      Image("branch")
tree branches in the middle-right portion of the tree.

--- Page 593 ---
          .resizable()
          .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesX[index]))
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesY[index]), 
            anchor: .center)
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesZ[index]), 
            anchor: .center)
          .position(positions[index])
          .frame(width: 200, height: 700)
          .offset(x: 50, y: 200)
          .animation(
              Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                durations[index])
                  .repeatForever(autoreverses: true)
              ,value: anglesZ)
          .onAppear {
              anglesX[index] = Double.random(in: 1...3)
              anglesY[index] = Double.random(in: 2...4)
              anglesZ[index] = Double.random(in: 3...6)
              positions[index] = CGPoint(x: 
                CGFloat.random(in: 0...10), y: 
                CGFloat.random(in: 0...8))
              durations[index] = Double.random(in: 4...6)
          }
  }
}.offset(x: -120, y: 0)
    
    ZStack {
      ForEach(0..<7) { index in
        Image("branch")
          .resizable()
          .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesX[index]))
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesY[index]), 
            anchor: .center)
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesZ[index]), 
            anchor: .center)
          .position(positions[index])
          .frame(width: 200, height: 700)
          .offset(x: 50, y: 200)
          .animation(
              Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                durations[index])
                  .repeatForever(autoreverses: true)
              ,value: anglesX)
          .onAppear {
              anglesX[index] = Double.random(in: 1...3)
              anglesY[index] = Double.random(in: 2...3)

--- Page 594 ---
              anglesZ[index] = Double.random(in: 3...5)
              positions[index] = CGPoint(x: 
                CGFloat.random(in: 0...10), y: 
                CGFloat.random(in: 0...12))
              durations[index] = Double.random(in: 4...6)
          }
  }
  }.offset(x: -100, y: 160)
  
  ZStack {
    ForEach(0..<7) { index in
      Image("branch")
          .resizable()
          .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesX[index]))
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesY[index]), 
            anchor: .center)
          .rotationEffect(Angle(degrees: anglesZ[index]), 
            anchor: .center)
          .position(positions[index])
          .frame(width: 180, height: 700)
          .offset(x: 50, y: 200)
          .animation(
              Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                durations[index])
                  .repeatForever(autoreverses: true)
              ,value: anglesY)
          .onAppear {
              anglesX[index] = Double.random(in: 0...2)
              anglesY[index] = Double.random(in: 0...3)
              anglesZ[index] = Double.random(in: 0...1)
              positions[index] = CGPoint(x: 
                CGFloat.random(in: 0...10), y: 
                CGFloat.random(in: 0...12))
              durations[index] = Double.random(in: 3...6)
          }
  }
  }.offset(x: 10, y: 100)
All of these ZStack do essentially the same thing, except that the code uses
different values. For example, in the ForEach loop, we’re using a different
range of values, and we’re also changing the random values for the x-, y-,
and z-axes, as well as the position and duration values. Also, each ZStack
has its own onAppear modifier, so it could randomly move its set of
branches at a different pace and on a different axis.

--- Page 595 ---
Now, let’s call this struct inside ContentView. We will call it just before the
SnowView call; this way, the snow will appear on top of the tree images:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            Image("background")
                .resizable().frame(width: 600, height: 900)
                .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
            Branches()
            SnowView()
        }
    }
}
Now, run the code and check out the really cool animation of the tree
branches blowing in the wind as the snow falls.
Play around with all the values that we’ve used in the various parameters
and customize them to your liking. Maybe you want fewer branches for a
thinner-looking tree, maybe you want the wind to blow much stronger, or
maybe you want to animate all the trees in the background image... you can
change all the settings to do just that.
Let’s continue our exploration of some interesting animations. Up next, we
will look at the rain particle system.
Animating rain
In our next project, let’s make it rain. We’re going to create a realistic effect
by creating rain from the Rain particle template and making it bounce off
the ground as you would see in a rainstorm. We’ll also create a puddle that
will subtly grow and shrink, appearing to react to the falling rain, and it will
also look like water, as we will add some blending options to it to give it a
transparent look for a spectacular effect that even shows some of the ground
underneath it.

--- Page 596 ---
Creating the Rain SpriteKit particle
file
Let’s get started. You know how to do this now – create an SKS file, choose
Rain from the particle template list, and name the file Rain too. Now,
configure the file to have the following attributes:

--- Page 598 ---
Figure 15.12: The attributes of the rain animation
Using the Rain particle template gives us rain right out of the box, but with
some slight adjustments to the Birthrate and Lifetime options, we can alter
how much of a rainstorm we want.
Let’s now create another new file, this time, a SwiftUI file, which we will
use to bring the rain effects into a SwiftUI view.
Creating the raindrops
To create the SwiftUI file, press Command + N and call this file DropView.
The code we will add to this file will be responsible for creating the
collision effect between a raindrop and the ground. We’ll also alter the
opacity and the blur to really help it blend into the scene.
Let’s now add the following code inside the DropView struct:
struct DropView: View {
  @State private var dropScale: CGFloat = 0.1
  @State private var xOffsets = (0..<300).map { _ in 
    CGFloat.random(in: -150...UIScreen.main.bounds.width)}
  @State private var yOffsets = (0..<240).map { _ in 
    CGFloat.random(in: UIScreen.main.bounds.height/5...
    UIScreen.main.bounds.height)}
  @State private var durations = (0..<150).map { _ in 
    Double.random(in: 0.3...1.0)}
  var body: some View {
      //Color.clear.edgesIgnoringSafeArea(.all)
          ForEach(0..<150) { index in
              Circle()
                  .fill(Color.white)
                      .opacity(0.6)
                    .blur(radius: 3)
                  .frame(width: 15, height: 15)
                  .scaleEffect(dropScale)
                  .rotation3DEffect(Angle(degrees: 80.0), 
                    axis: (x: 1, y: 0, z: 0))
                  .offset(x: xOffsets[index] - 140, y: 
                    yOffsets[index])
                  .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                    durations[index]).repeatForever

--- Page 599 ---
                    (autoreverses: true), value: dropScale)
                  .onAppear {
                      dropScale = 0.8
                  }
          }
  }
}
There’s a lot going on here, so let’s break it down line by line.
There are four State variables we need and each one has a specific task:
Let’s take a closer look at the map method since it is being used by three of
our properties. The map method is a higher-order function in Swift that
transforms an array of values into a new array of different values. It takes a
closure expression as an argument, which is executed for each element in
the original array and returns a new value for that element. The resulting
array is then the combination of all of these new values.
In the code, the map method is being used to transform the range of integers
between 0 and <300 into an array of CGFloat values, by using the
CGFloat.random(in:) method to generate a random value for each element
in the range. The closure expression passed to the map method takes a single
argument, _, which is a placeholder for the current element of the range,
and returns a new CGFloat value, generated by CGFloat.random(in:
-150...UIScreen.main.bounds.width). The map method combines all of
The first variable is of the CGFloat type and gets an initial value of
0.1. This variable is used to control the scale of the drops.
The next two variables create arrays of CGFloat values, stored in the
xOffsets and yOffsets state variables. The map method is used to
generate random CGFloat values and the CGFloat.random(in:) method
is used to generate a random CGFloat value within a given range. In
short, these variables are used to set a random x- and y-coordinate
position for each drop.
The final variable is the durations variable, which randomizes the
duration of the animation.

--- Page 600 ---
these new values into a single array, which is then assigned to the xOffsets
variable.
The map method is an important and versatile function in Swift, as it allows
you to easily transform arrays and sequences of values into new arrays and
sequences. Additionally, the map method is often used in combination with
other functional programming techniques such as filter and reduce, to
perform complex operations on arrays and sequences in a more efficient
and maintainable way.
Now, let’s move into the body property and look at what the code is doing
there.
We use a ForEach loop to iterate through a range from 0 and <150, and
create a Circle view with each iteration – the circle will be the raindrop.
Then, we set the fill color of the Circle view to white, the width and
height values to 15, and apply a scaleEffect with the value determined by
the dropScale variable.
Next, we apply rotation3DEffect to the Circle view, with an angle of 80
degrees on the x-axis; we want to rotate the drop so that it appears more like
a raindrop colliding with the ground. Following that, we set its offset using
the xOffsets and yOffsets variables with a value determined by the index.
We then add the animation, setting the duration to be determined by the
index constant, and repeating the animation with autoreverse set to true
to create the realistic collision of the raindrop with the ground.
Finally, in the onAppear modifier, we give the DropScale variable a value
of 0.8.
Running that in the previews will be a little difficult to see because of the
white background, but let’s keep going and we’ll check out the results
shortly.
Let’s now create a new view that will make a puddle of water that we can
animate and add to the scene.

--- Page 601 ---
Creating the puddle
Let’s now add a puddle to our scene, which we’ll do in a new SwiftUI View
file called PuddleView. I’m going to add all the code for this view and then
we’ll review how it works:
struct PuddleView: View {
  @State private var scaleX: CGFloat = 0.5
  @State private var scaleY: CGFloat = 0.5
  var body: some View {
    ZStack {
      Capsule()
          .fill(LinearGradient(gradient: Gradient(colors: 
            [.white,  .black,.gray, .white,.black]), 
            startPoint: .topLeading, endPoint:  
            .bottomTrailing))
          .opacity(0.5)
          .blur(radius: 5)
          .frame(width: 600, height: 500)
          .scaleEffect(x: scaleX, y: scaleY, anchor: 
        .center)
      .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
        8.0).repeatForever(autoreverses: true),value: 
        scaleX)
      //creates the ripple
          .overlay(
              Capsule()
                  .stroke(Color.gray, lineWidth: 5)
                  .opacity(0.5 )
                  .frame(width: 350, height: 200)
                  .offset(x: 0, y: -15)
                  .scaleEffect(x: scaleX + 0.03, y: scaleY 
                    + 0.03, anchor: .center)
                  .animation(Animation.easeInOut(duration: 
                    8.0).repeatForever(autoreverses: true), 
                    value: scaleY)
                  .onAppear {
                      scaleX = 0.54
                      scaleY = 0.6
                  }).rotation3DEffect(Angle(degrees: 81.0), 
                    axis: (x: 1, y: 0, z: 0))
      
  } .offset(x: -50, y: 300)
      .onAppear {
          scaleX = 0.55

--- Page 602 ---
          scaleY = 0.6
      }
  }
}
This code defines a struct called PuddleView that has two properties,
scaleX and scaleY, which are both CGFloat values. The body property of
the struct is defined as follows:
A ZStack view is created, which arranges views on top of each other.
Inside ZStack, a Capsule view is created, which will be the shape of a
puddle. The Capsule view is filled with a LinearGradient of colors and
is then modified with several modifiers:
The opacity modifier is set to 0.5, making it partially transparent.
The blur modifier is set with a radius of 5 pixels.
The frame modifier sets the width property to 600 pixels and
height to 500 pixels.
The scaleEffect modifier is set with the x and y scale values set
to scaleX and scaleY, respectively. The anchor parameter is set to
.center, indicating that the scaling should be the center of the
capsule.
The animation modifier has a scaleX value, with an easeInOut
timing function and a duration value of 8 seconds, and is set to
repeat forever with autoreverses.
Then,.overlay() is used to create a new Capsule view that is placed
on top of the previous one. This new Capsule view is also modified
with several modifiers:
The stroke modifier adds a gray stroke with a line width of 5
pixels.
The opacity modifier is set to 0.5, making it partially transparent.

--- Page 603 ---
In summary, this code creates a view that looks like a puddle of water by
using a gradient fill that’s partially transparent and blurred, and with a
ripple effect added. The ripple effect is created by applying a scale effect to
the second capsule view and animating the scaleX and scaleY properties so
that it appears to be moving. The ripple effect is also rotated on the x-axis to
make it more interesting.
Putting it all together
With PuddleView done, let’s just fill out ContentView and check out the
animation. Add the following code to modify ContentView:
The frame modifier sets the width property to 350 pixels and
height to 200 pixels.
The offset modifier shifts the capsule slightly upward.
The scaleEffect modifier sets the x and y scale values, with
scaleX set to + 0.03 and scaleY to + 0.03, respectively. The
anchor parameter is set to .center, indicating that the scaling
should be centered on the capsule.
The animation modifier has a scaleY value, with an easeInOut
timing function and a duration value of 8 seconds, and is set to
repeat forever with autoreverses.
The onAppear modifier sets the initial value of scaleX and scaleY
to 0.54 and 0.6, respectively.
The rotation3DEffect modifiers set an angle of 81 degrees on the
x-axis.
The ZStack view is then modified with .offset(x: -50, y: 300)
and .onAppear { scaleX = 0.55; scaleY = 0.6 }. This shifts the
group view 50 pixels to the left and 300 pixels downward. This code
block is executed when the view appears and sets the initial values of
scaleX and scaleY to 0.55 and 0.6, respectively.

--- Page 604 ---
import SpriteKit
import SwiftUI
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        ZStack {
            Image("street")
                   .resizable()
                   .scaledToFill()
            PuddleView()//.blendMode(.hardLight)
            RainView()
            DropView()
            RainView()
        }.edgesIgnoringSafeArea(.all)
    }
}
In ContentView, we added an image of a street, resized and scaled it, then
called PuddleView. In PuddleView, blendMode is set to hardLight. Play
around with the blend mode options for different looks and effects, but I
think the hard light gives the best water effect so far, creating a glass-like
look that is perfect for making a puddle of water where you can see some of
the ground underneath.
Next, I called RainView to add the rain, then DropView to add the collision
effect of the raindrops hitting the ground, and then Rainview again just to
add a little more rain to the mix. This is the result:

--- Page 606 ---
Figure 15.13: The raindrops
This creates a nice effect of raindrops colliding with the ground and even
with the puddle.
Let’s continue and take a look at the Magic particle template and we will
see how we can use an image to make the particles.
Animating a magic wand
In this project, we’re going to use the Magic particle system, and we will
display that magic from the tip of a wand. You will be able to move the
wand around the screen with your finger, and as it moves, magic will
emanate from its tip. We will also have a cemetery background including a
gravestone, and when you tap on the gravestone, a skeleton will rise up
from it.
So, let’s get started with our spooky animation. Create a new project and
call this one Magic. Next, add the resources for this project by dragging
them from the Chapter 15 | Magic folder on GitHub into the Asset Catalog.
Then, we can make our particle file.
Creating the magic SpriteKit particle
file
As we’ve done before, create a new SpriteKit particle file, but select the
Magic particle template, and simply call the file Magic. Now, let’s do
something a little different this time – using the Texture field in the
Attributes panel, select the star image that you placed into the Asset
Catalog. We’re going to make the particle system based on that image, so
all the particles will be stars. Next, change the rest of the fields so the
values look like the following:

--- Page 608 ---
Figure 15.14: The attributes of the magic animation
Notice the Color Ramp field. It has three colors selected. If you would like
to select a color for the Color Ramp field, simply click anywhere along the
color selector, and then a pop-up color box will come up allowing you to
choose a color. I’ve chosen three colors here: red will be the center of the
animation, green will surround it, and the third color is yellow, which will
be the outer part of the magic animation.
Next, we want to make this Magic.sks file available as a SwiftUI view. So,
let’s create a new Swift file, and call it MagicView. Then, add the following
code to the file:
import SwiftUI
import SpriteKit
struct MagicView: UIViewRepresentable {
    func makeUIView(context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<MagicView>) -> SKView {
        let view = SKView(frame: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 
          400, height: 400))
        view.backgroundColor = .clear
        let scene = MagicScene(size: CGSize(width: 900, 
          height: 600))
        scene.backgroundColor = UIColor.clear
        scene.scaleMode = .aspectFill
        view.presentScene(scene)
        return view
    }
    func updateUIView(_ uiView: SKView, context: 
      UIViewRepresentableContext<MagicView>) {
    }
}
We’ve worked with this code in previous projects, so we’re familiar with it
by now.
The code defines a struct called MagicView, which conforms to the
UIViewRepresentable protocol in SwiftUI. The makeUIView function
creates an instance of an SKView with a given frame size and sets its
background color to clear.

--- Page 609 ---
It then creates an instance of MagicScene, specifying its size, setting its
background color to clear, and scaling it to aspectFill. Finally, the
created scene is presented on SKView, and the SKView instance is returned.
The updateUIView function does not perform any actions for us, as we
don’t need to update anything, but it is a required method for the
UIViewRepresentable protocol.
Now, the code will give us an error because of this line: let scene =
MagicScene(size: CGSize(width: 900, height: 600)). This is because
we’re creating a scene and setting it to the MagicScene class, but we haven’t
created a MagicScene class yet.
So, let’s do that now. Let’s create the MagicScene class, which will contain
the properties and functions we need to manipulate the magic coming from
the wand, as well as making the skeleton rise up from the ground. Create a
new Swift file and call this Magic. I’m going to place all of the code here
and then I’ll explain how it works:
import Foundation
import SwiftUI
import SpriteKit
class MagicScene: SKScene {
  var magic: SKEmitterNode!
  var wand: SKSpriteNode!
  override func touchesMoved(_ touches: Set<UITouch>, 
    with event: UIEvent?) {
      let touch = touches.first!
      let touchLocation = touch.location(in: self)
      wand.position = CGPoint(x: touchLocation.x - 30, y: 
        touchLocation.y + wand.frame.size.height / 2 - 20)
      ///make the skeleton appear
      if touchLocation.x < frame.size.width * 0.55 && 
        touchLocation.y < frame.size.height * 0.12 {
          let skeleton = SKSpriteNode(imageNamed: 
            "skeleton")
          skeleton.position = CGPoint(x: frame.size.width / 
            2 - 80, y: 175)
          skeleton.size = CGSize(width: skeleton.size.width 
            / 2, height: skeleton.size.height / 2)
          addChild(skeleton)
          let moveAction = SKAction.move(to: CGPoint(x: 

--- Page 610 ---
            frame.size.width / 2 - 50, y: frame.size.height 
            / 2), duration: 2.0)
          skeleton.run(moveAction)
      }
      wand.zPosition = 2
      let trail = SKEmitterNode(fileNamed: "Magic.sks")!
      trail.particlePositionRange = CGVector(dx: 5, dy: 5)
      trail.particleSpeed = 50
      trail.position = CGPoint(x: wand.position.x - 40, y: 
        wand.position.y + wand.frame.size.height / 2 + 
        trail.particlePositionRange.dy)
      addChild(trail)
      let fadeAway = SKAction.fadeOut(withDuration: 1.2)
      trail.run(fadeAway) {
          trail.removeFromParent()
      }
  }
  override func didMove(to view: SKView) {
      let stone = SKSpriteNode(imageNamed: "stone")
      stone.position = CGPoint(x: frame.size.width / 2.3, 
        y: frame.size.height / 2 - 150)
      stone.size = CGSize(width: 120, height: 175)
      stone.zRotation = CGFloat(Double.pi / 20)
      stone.zPosition = 2
         addChild(stone)
      guard let magic = SKEmitterNode(fileNamed: 
        "Magic.sks") else { return }
      magic.particlePositionRange = CGVector(dx: 5, dy: 5)
      magic.particleSpeed = 50
      addChild(magic)
      self.magic = magic
      wand = SKSpriteNode(imageNamed: "wand")
      wand.position = CGPoint(x: frame.size.width / 2, y: 
        frame.size.height / 3)
      wand.size = CGSize(width: 80, height: 180)
      addChild(wand)
  }
}
Okay, let’s break down the code and see what it’s doing here.
Inside the MagicScene class, there are two instance variables declared:
magic is an instance of SKEmitterNode, which is a class from SpriteKit
that represents an emitter that can create particles.

--- Page 611 ---
The MagicScene class overrides two methods from SKScene:
That completes the code for the magic.sks file. Let’s continue and head
into ContentView and add a little bit of code there so we can see the magic.
All we need to do is add the graveyard background scene and call
MagicView. To do this, change your ContentView to the following:
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
    ZStack {
        Image("graveyard")
            .resizable()
            .scaledToFill().frame(width: 500, height: 900)
        MagicView()
      }
  }
}
wand is an instance of SKSpriteNode, which is a class from SpriteKit
that represents a textured rectangle.
The touchesMoved(_:with:) method is called when the user moves
their finger across the screen. Inside this method, the position of the
wand sprite is updated to follow the user’s touch location. If the touch
location is in a specific area of the screen, a skeleton sprite is created
and animated to move to a specific location on the screen, straight up.
Then, a new SKEmitterNode instance is created and added as a child of
the MagicScene instance. This emitter is positioned relative to the wand
sprite and emits particles that we created in the .sks file, and simulates
the magic. After a duration of 1.2 seconds, the emitter fades away and is
removed from the scene.
The didMove(to:) method is called once when the scene is first
presented. Inside this method, a stone sprite is created and positioned on
the screen. Then, an SKEmitterNode instance is created and added as a
child of the MagicScene instance. This emitter will also simulate magic
particles. Finally, a wand sprite is created and positioned on the screen.

--- Page 612 ---
With that bit of code, the project is done. Run the animation and start
making magic:

--- Page 614 ---
Figure 15.15: The magic wand and graveyard scene
Move the wand around and see the magic coming out of its tip, then tap on
the gravestone to wake the skeleton!
Summary
With SpriteKit’s extensive support for physics and particle systems,
combined with SwiftUI’s easy-to-use interface and modern design
capabilities, you can create dynamic, engaging animations that bring your
apps to life. As we have seen here, you can create smoke, rain, fire, snow,
and magic, but there are even more particle systems to try and experiment
with.
As always, alter each project to your liking, and add your own unique
creativity and ideas. Add sound to various parts of each project if you want
– for example, in the magic wand project, maybe when the wand is moving,
play a wand sound effect. Enhance the animations by altering the values,
changing the images, or building out more complex scenes using the tools
you now have. Just have fun because the effects are only limited by your
imagination.
And with that, we have completed the final projects, and also the final
chapter.
Throughout the book, we delved into both implicit and explicit animations,
exploring the differences between them and how to use them to achieve
different effects. As we progressed through the book, we gradually
introduced different modifiers and more challenging animation techniques,
from basic bounces to more advanced moves. We also built two complete
games that you can modify in many different ways.
You now have the knowledge, skills, and a deeper understanding of SwiftUI
animations to be able to implement a wide range of effects that will take
your app to the next level and create engaging and dynamic user
experiences.

--- Page 615 ---
Happy animating!
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 616 ---
Index
As this ebook edition doesn't have fixed pagination, the page numbers
below are hyperlinked for reference only, based on the printed edition of
this book.
Symbols
.animation() modifier 62
@Binding wrapper 120
A
Affinity Designer 212
Alert view
user’s score, displaying 384-386
animatable properties
corner radius 79-81
exploring 63
hue rotation 65-67
offset property 63, 64
opacity 67-69
scale 70-74
stroke 75, 76
trim 77, 78

--- Page 617 ---
animated breath
adding 197-200
animated floating buoy
adding, to scene 266, 267
animation, adding 265, 266
light, making to blink 260-264
animated strokes
combining 240, 241
animating variables
adding 134
animation 57, 58
triggering 62
animation types
explicit animation 61
implicit animation 60
Application Programming Interface (API) 12
Assets catalog 98
images, adding to 98-100
Auto Layout 201
B

--- Page 618 ---
Binding variable
adding 120, 272
bitmap 210
bouquet of flowers project
blur modifier, using to create vapor effect 190-193
falling snow, creating in scene 200
flower petals, animating in arc 194-197
text labels, animating 187-190
variables, adding 186, 187
winter background, adding 186, 187
breathing app
background color, implementing 84-86
circles, adding 87
circles, animating 92-95
first pair of circles, adding 87-89
second pair of circles, adding 89-91
setting up, with Xcode 83
third pair of circles, adding 91, 92
variables, adding 84
button 110

--- Page 619 ---
used, for tracking user’s score 381, 383
ButtonFlash 331
button view 62
C
CAEmitter 203
cell 204
CGFloat type 78
child view 16
circular gear
animating 147-153
closures 41, 42
coffee steam
animating 407
ContentView, filling out 411, 412
Coffee Steam struct
creating 409-411
color game
background, adding 388
resetting 386, 387
user’s score, displaying in Alert view 384-386

--- Page 620 ---
user’s score, tracking with button 381-383
colors 360
color sliders
creating 376-381
computed properties 13-15
computed property 106
Confetti
adding, with Swift Packages 389-391
ContentView
background, adding 181-183
belts, adding 177-179
fan, adding 181
files, organizing 166, 167
gears, adding along x-, y-, and z-axes 169-174
gear shafts, adding 180, 181
motor, adding 167-169
setting up, for animation 252-254
wave shape, animating 254-258
wave shape, duplicating 254-258
worm gear, adding 174-176

--- Page 621 ---
control view 62
coordinate spaces
global space 50
local space 50
Core Animation Emitter 203
Core Graphics (CG) 78
corner radius 79, 80
animating 80, 81
curve 58
D
Data Model
creating, with ObservableObject protocol 279-281
Data Model functions, elevator project
doorOpenTimer function, adding 282, 283
floorNumbers function, adding 285, 286
playChimeSound function, adding 283, 284
playDoorOpenCloseSound function, adding 284
stopTimer function, adding 287
declarative programming 3-5
Divider views 31

--- Page 622 ---
horizontal divider 31
thickness 34
vertical 32, 33
E
easeInOut timing curve 59
easeIn timing curve 59
easeOut timing curve 59
elevator project
assembling, with images and GeometryReader view 272-276
background, adding 288
Binding variable, adding 271
button, adding 289, 290
Data Model functions, adding 282
doors, animating 291
floor indicator lights, adding 291, 292
people, pushing into 276-278
project, setting up 272
emitter 204
explicit animation 61
F

--- Page 623 ---
falling snow, creating in scene 200
CAEmitter class, adding 203-206
methods and errors, dealing with 201-203
UIViewRepresentable protocol, adding 201
fan image
animating 165, 166
flower bouquet
adding 197-200
Footer View
adding, to display information 351-356
ForEach view
using 121-123
foundWords 352
function stubs 299
G
gear belt
creating, with marching ants effect 159-163
gear shaft image
animating 164, 165
GeometryReader 43-46

--- Page 624 ---
position, reading 50-56
views, positioning 49, 50
views, sizing 46-48
gesture 62
girl on swing project
animating variables, adding 134
background, adding 135
girl, adding 137
images, adding to scene 134
images, combining 138-141
images, gathering 129-133
images, slicing 129-133
left leg, adding 137
mask modifier, using 142-145
right leg, adding 135-137
Groups feature 166
guess circle
creating 362-366
guess rectangle
creating 371-375

--- Page 625 ---
H
heart image
stroke animation, creating 230-236
HStack 22-24
hue rotation effect 65
animating 67
Xcode example 65, 66
HueRotation modifier
using 125-127
I
images
adding, to Assets catalog 98-100
animating, with stroke modifier 224
converting, into Swift code 210
Image view
adding 125-127
imperative programming 3-5
implicit animation 60, 61
Inkscape
download link 212

--- Page 626 ---
interpolation 58
K
Kaleidoscope effects project
adding 120
background color, adding 124, 125
HueRotation modifier, adding 125-127
Image view, adding 125-127
Picker control, adding with ForEach view 121-123
variable, adding 124, 125
L
linear timing curve 59
M
magic SpriteKit particle file
creating 438-444
magic wand
animating 438
marching ants effect
used, for creating gear belt 159-163
mask modifier
using 142-145

--- Page 627 ---
model 12
O
object-oriented programming (OOP) 2
ObservableObject protocol
Data Model, creating with 279-281
ocean scene
animated floating buoy, adding 258-260
ocean scene, creating
sound effects, adding 267-269
wave’s animatableData property, adding 251, 252
wave shape, animating 254-258
wave shape, creating with Shape protocol and Path function 244-250
wave shape, duplicating 254-258
wave’s offset property, adding 244
offset property 63
animating 64
onAppear() modifier 62
onDisappear() modifier 62
opacity 67
animating 69

--- Page 628 ---
example 68, 69
OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL) 401
optional binding 114
P
padding modifier 35-40
particle emitters 393
Picker control
adding 121-123
Picker view 121
creating 367-370
pipe smoke
animating 394
pixels 36
PlaySound 357
points 36
Pragma Marks 166
R
rain
animating 430
animation, checking 437, 438

--- Page 629 ---
ContentView, filling out 437, 438
puddle, creating 434-436
raindrops
creating 432-434
Rain SpriteKit particle file
creating 430-432
raster image 210
record player 97
arm, creating 108-110
box, creating 101-105
custom dynamic button, creating 110-112
elements, combining 115-117
elements, creating 101
project, testing 117, 118
sound file, creating to play audio 113, 114
spinning record, creating 105-108
Remove Background 211
URL 211
RGB colors 360
rocket fire

--- Page 630 ---
animating 413
ContentView, filling out 416, 417
FireView, adding 413, 414
RocketView, adding 414, 415
S
scalable vector graphics (.svg) file 211
scaleEffect modifier 70
scale property 70
animating 71-74
settings screen
creating 327-329
shader 401
Smoke file
integrating, into SwiftUI View 403-407
Smoke SpriteKit particle file
creating 407-409
snow blizzard
animating 417
tree branches, animating 423-430
view, creating to combine two SKS files 421-423

--- Page 631 ---
Snow SpriteKit particle files
creating 417-421
sound effects
adding 267, 268
Spacer views 29, 30
SpriteKit 393
SpriteKit particle emitter
Acceleration field 399
Alpha field 399
Angle fields 398
Background field 397
Blend Mode field 401
Color Blend field 400
Color Ramp field 400
Custom Shader field 401, 402
Emitter field 397
Field Mask field 401
Lifetime field 398
Name field 397
Position Range field 398

--- Page 632 ---
Rotation Start field 400
Scale field 399
Speed field 398
Texture field 397
SpriteKit particle file
creating 394-397
SpriteKit Scene (SKS) particle file 394
stacks 16
combining 26-29
HStack 22
ZStack 25
state 11, 12
Storyboards 201
stroke, animating around bitmap image
image backgrounds, removing 210, 211
images, vectorizing into SCV file 211-219
SVG file, translating into Swift code 219-224
stroke animation 76
creating, on heart image 230-236
creating, on SwiftUI logo image 237-240

--- Page 633 ---
creating, on WE image 224-230
stroke modifier
used, for animating images 224
sublayers 203
Swift code
images, converting into 210
SVG file, translating into 219-224
Swift Packages
used, for adding Confetti 389-391
Swift template 279
SwiftUI
features 3
SwiftUI logo image
stroke animation, creating 237-240
SwiftUI structures 12, 13
closures 41, 42
computed properties 13-15
Divider view 31
GeometryReader 43-46
padding modifier 35-40

--- Page 634 ---
Spacer view 29, 30
stacks 16
SwiftUI View 351
Smoke file, integrating into 403-407
T
target circle
creating 362-366
target rectangle
creating 371-375
ternary operator 64
timer 62
timing curves 58
easeIn 59
easeInOut 59
easeOut 59
linear timing curve 59
Title view
creating 360, 361
trim
animating 78

--- Page 635 ---
example 77
U
UI, word game
animations, adding to 342-345
background, adding to scene 340, 341
styling 339
V
vector images 210
Vector Magic 211
views 13
VStack 16-18
alignment 18-20
spacing 20, 21
W
wave
animatableData property, adding 251, 252
offset property, adding 244
withAnimation() function 62
word game
character count, displaying next to each word in list 305, 306

--- Page 636 ---
DataModel, creating 296-301
entered words, checking for duplicates 307, 308
Footer View, adding to display more information 351-356
haptics and button sounds, adding 356-358
Header View, creating with Info button 316-319
settings screen, creating 327-329
UI, styling 339
user feedback, implementing with alerts 346-351
PickerView, adding 319, 320
PickerView, creating 319
PickerView, styling 321-326
project, setting up 296-301
random word, adding with button press 308-310
UI, building by adding list 301-305
UI, building by adding text field 301-305
user’s entered word, checking for possibility 310-313
user’s entered word, checking in dictionary 313-316
word game, settings screen
checkmark, adding 335, 337
dismiss button, adding 337-339

--- Page 637 ---
language buttons, adding 329-335
worm gear 153
animating, shadows used 153-159
wrapper 201
X
Xcode Interface
exploring 5-11
XML 219
Z
ZIndex modifier 166
ZStack 25, 26
Why subscribe?
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published,
with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version
at packtpub.com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount
Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks
and Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals
Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
Get a free eBook or video every month
Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content

--- Page 638 ---
on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com
for more details.
At www.packtpub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical
articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive
discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 639 ---
Other Books You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by
Packt:


--- Page 640 ---
iOS 16 Programming for Beginners - Seventh Edition
Ahmad Sahar, Craig Clayton
ISBN: 978-1-80323-704-6
Get to grips with the fundamentals of Xcode 14 and Swift 5.7, the
building blocks of iOS development
Understand how to prototype an app using storyboards
Discover the Model-View-Controller design pattern and how to
implement the desired functionality within an app
Implement the latest iOS 16 features such as SwiftUI, Lock screen
widgets, and WeatherKit
Convert an existing iPad app into a Mac app with Mac Catalyst
Design, deploy, and test your iOS applications with design patterns
and best practices

--- Page 641 ---
SwiftUI Cookbook - Second Edition
Giordano Scalzo, Edgar Nzokwe

--- Page 642 ---
ISBN: 978-1-80323-445-8
Packt is searching for authors like
you
If you're interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit
authors.packtpub.com and apply today. We have worked with thousands of
developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their
insight with the global tech community. You can make a general
application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author
for, or submit your own idea.
Share Your Thoughts
Now you’ve finished Animating SwiftUI Applications, we’d love to hear
your thoughts! If you purchased the book from Amazon, please click here to
go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your
feedback or leave a review on the site that you purchased it from.
Explore various layout presentations in SwiftUI such as HStack,
VStack, LazyHStack, and LazyVGrid
Create widgets to quickly display relevant content at glance
Get up to speed with drawings in SwiftUI using built-in shapes,
custom paths, and polygons
Discover modern animation and transition techniques in SwiftUI
Add user authentication using Firebase and Sign in with Apple
Manage concurrency with Combine and async/await in SwiftUI
Solve the most common SwiftUI problems, such as integrating a
MapKit map, unit testing, snapshot testing, and previewing layouts

--- Page 643 ---
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us
make sure we’re delivering excellent quality content.
Download a free PDF copy of this
book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books
everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version
of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code
from your favorite technical books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts,
newsletters, and great free content in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1. Scan the QR code or visit the link below


--- Page 644 ---
https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781803232669
2. Submit your proof of purchase
3. That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email
directly
OceanofPDF.com