--- Page 2 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
Working Through This Book
Requirements
Source Code
Contact
Chapter 1: Introduction to iOS Development
The Exercise Application
Requirements
Preparing Xcode for Development
Summary
Chapter 2: Your First iOS Application
Exploring Xcode
Running Apps in the Simulator
Running Apps in Physical iPhone Devices
Summary
Section 1: Swift Programming Basics
Chapter 3: Swift Playground and Variables

--- Page 3 ---
Chapter 4: Swift Basic Data Types and Operators
Chapter 5: Control Flow in Swift
Chapter 6: Swift Collections
Chapter 7: Swift Function and Closure
Chapter 8: Swift Objects - Class and Structure
Chapter 9: Enumeration, Protocol, and Extension
Chapter 10: Swift Libraries and Concurrency
Section 2: Developing iOS Apps With Swift
Chapter 11: Introduction to SwiftUI - Views and
Modifiers
Chapter 12: Managing and Storing App Data With
SwiftData
Chapter 13: Editing and Searching Task Data
Chapter 14: Delete, Filter, and Sort Task Data
Chapter 15: Accessing the Photos Library and Saving
Image
Chapter 16: Accessing Maps and Adding Locations
Chapter 18: Adding Application Widget
Chapter 19: Publishing to App Store
Section 3: Legacy iOS Development Topics
Chapter 20: Introduction to UIKit and Storyboard
Chapter 21: Storyboard Segue, Swipe Actions, and
TableViewCell
Chapter 22: UIKit Programmatic Interface
Chapter 23: Getting Started With Core Data

--- Page 4 ---
Wrapping Up
About the author
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 5 ---
iOS App Development for Beginners
A Step-By-Step Practical Guide to Programming iOS Applications
With Swift, SwiftUI, SwiftData, and Xcode
By Nathan Sebhastian
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 6 ---
PREFACE
The goal of this book is to provide a gentle step-by-step
instructions that help you learn how to develop iOS
applications from scratch.
Together, we will cover essential iOS development topics,
including the Swift programming language, SwiftUI, SwiftData,
PhotosUI, MapKit, and WidgetKit. You’ll learn how to combine
these tools to create a dynamic, user-friendly iOS mobile
application.
After finishing this book, you will know how to develop and
publish iOS apps with confidence.
Working Through This Book
This book is divided into three sections, each dedicated to a key
aspect of iOS development.
Section 1 introduces the Swift programming language. You’ll
explore essential topics such as variables, data types, control
flow, collections, functions, classes, protocols, and more. By the
end of this section, you will have a solid foundation to start
building iOS applications using Swift.

--- Page 7 ---
Section 2 guides you through the development of an iOS
application using Xcode and Swift. You’ll get hands-on
experience with various iOS libraries and frameworks,
including SwiftUI, SwiftData, PhotosUI, MapKit, and WidgetKit.
This section teaches you how to integrate these tools to create a
functional and extensible iOS app.
Section 3 focuses on legacy iOS development techniques,
covering tools like UIKit, Storyboard, and Core Data. This
section will help you understand older codebases and work
with legacy iOS projects.
I encourage you to actively write and run the code examples
provided in this book. Coding alongside the examples will give
you practical experience and a deeper understanding of iOS
development.
A tip to make the most of this book: Take at least a 10-minute
break after finishing a chapter, so that you can regain your
energy and focus.
Also, don’t despair if some concept is hard to understand.
Learning anything new is hard for the first time, especially
something technical like programming. The most important
thing is to keep going.
Requirements
Basic programming knowledge is all you need. If you’ve ever
written a "Hello, World!" program in any language, you’ll be
able to follow along and make the most from this book.

--- Page 8 ---
No prior experience with iOS development is necessary as I will
introduce everything you need, such as the Swift programming
language, SwiftUI, and the SwiftData framework.
Source Code
You can download the source code from GitHub at the following
link:
https://github.com/nathansebhastian/ios-for-beginners
Click on the 'Code' button, then click on the 'Download ZIP' link
as shown below:
Figure 1. Download the Source Code at GitHub
You need to extract the archive to access the code. Usually, you
can just double-click the archive to extract the content.
The number in the folder name indicates the chapter number
in this book.

--- Page 9 ---
Contact
If you need help, or want to suggest improvements for the book,
you can contact me using email at
nathan@codewithnathan.com.
Additionally, You can get my 7-day free email course called
Mindset of the Successful Software Developer at
https://g.codewithnathan.com/mindset
Each email unveils a slice of wisdom that I got after working as
a web developer and programmer for 8+ years in the tech
industry, from startups to mega-corporations. It offers a fresh
perspective on what it means to be a happy and successful
software developer.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 10 ---
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION TO
IOS DEVELOPMENT
iOS development is the process of creating applications (apps)
that run on iOS, Apple’s operating system for iPhones. This
involves using Apple’s development tools, programming
languages, and frameworks to design, build, and publish apps
that are compatible with iOS devices.
Developing for the iOS platform offers a valuable opportunity
due to its large, global user base. With millions of active users,
the App Store provides a wide marketplace for developers to
reach potential customers.
Based on how the user interface is developed, there are two
main approaches to developing iOS apps: SwiftUI and UIKit
Storyboard.
SwiftUI is the newer framework that’s introduced by Apple in
2019. It enables developers to design user interfaces using code.
On the other hand, UIKit is an older approach to create user
interface. It provides a visual drag-and-drop method for
building user interfaces.

--- Page 11 ---
This book covers both SwiftUI and UIKit, but the main focus will
be on SwiftUI as it’s clear that Apple is promoting SwiftUI as the
preferred method for developing iOS interfaces. It’s also
generally easier for beginners to learn compared to Storyboard.
However, UIKit remains widely used in the industry and has
been a reliable method for building iOS interfaces for many
years. Knowing UIKit is important if you want to increase your
chances of working as an iOS developer.
The Exercise Application
To make the learning practical, we’re going to build an iOS
application for managing tasks called Taskly.
In this application, you’ll be able to add, search, sort, and filter
tasks by a specific attribute:


--- Page 12 ---
The tasks data will be saved using SwiftData. You can also
update or delete a task using swipe buttons:
The app can access the device photo library and maps as well:


--- Page 13 ---
Finally, the app will have an accompanying widget so that users
can quickly look at their incomplete tasks without having to
open the app:
All common features in creating mobile applications like create,
read, update, delete, filter, and sort data will be added to this
application.
With this practice, you will get the experience of developing an
iOS application using Swift and SwiftUI from scratch.
Requirements
To begin developing iOS applications, you will need the
following:

--- Page 14 ---
1. An Apple desktop or laptop (iMac, Mac Mini, Macbook,
.etc)
2. An iPhone device for testing (optional)
3. Xcode
4. Apple ID account (free is enough)
You might think that an apple desktop or laptop is obvious, but I
have seen people trying to run macOS on a Windows computer
(Hackintosh) to do iOS development.
While it might work, this approach often leads to unexpected
issues, especially when running Xcode. It may also cause
instability or limited functionalities during development
because macOS is designed to run on Apple hardware.
You need a Mac computer with at least macOS Sonoma 14.5 so
that you can run the latest version of Xcode, which is Xcode 16
at the moment of this writing.
If you have an iOS device, you can test the application on a
physical device, but this is not mandatory as Xcode includes an
iPhone simulator.
Xcode is Apple’s official integrated development environment
(IDE) that you will use to develop applications for Apple
devices.
An Apple ID is also needed to enable testing on a physical
device and create app groups, which we will do in the following
chapters.

--- Page 15 ---
Please note that you do not need a paid developer account
unless you want to publish your application to the App Store. A
free Apple ID account is enough for building iOS applications.
If you need to create an Apple ID, you can follow this guide:
https://g.codewithnathan.com/create-apple-id
Once you have the Apple ID ready, let’s install Xcode.
Preparing Xcode for Development
To download and install Xcode for free, you need to open the
App Store and then search for Xcode in the search bar.
You should see the application presented as follows:
Click on the 'Get' button, and then click on the 'Install' button to
start downloading the application to your computer. You will be
asked to input your Apple ID before the download can start.
Note that Xcode is quite large, so it might take a while for the
download to finish. Once the download is finished, go ahead

--- Page 16 ---
and open the application.
You will be greeted by the license agreements page:
Feel free to read the terms and conditions stated on the page,
and click Agree when you’re done. You might be asked to input
your computer’s username and password to agree with the license.
Next, you will see a screen where you can select the platforms
you want to develop for. Check on the iOS menu, then click the
'Download & Install' button:

--- Page 17 ---
If you are using an Apple Silicon Mac, you may be asked to
install Rosetta so that the computer can run Intel-based
applications. Just click on the Install button.
Finally, you will be presented with the Xcode main page, where
you can create a new project, clone a git repository or open an
existing project:

--- Page 18 ---
The iOS simulator should also be downloaded simultaneously.
Please note that it might take a while because of the large size:
This means you have successfully prepared Xcode for iOS
development. Nice work!
Summary
In this chapter, we’ve learned what is iOS development and the
two main approaches to building an iOS application. We’ve also

--- Page 19 ---
prepared an Apple ID and installed Xcode so that we can start
the development process.
If you encounter any issues, you can email me at
nathan@codewithnathan.com and I will do my best to help you.
Next, we will explore Xcode and create our first iOS application.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 20 ---
CHAPTER 2: YOUR FIRST IOS
APPLICATION
In this chapter, you’re going to create an iOS application
project, explore the Xcode interface, then learn how to run the
application in Xcode simulator and iPhone devices.
On the Xcode main page, select the Create New Project…  menu
and you will see the project template configuration screen.
Select iOS, and then choose App and click the Next button:

--- Page 21 ---
Next, you need to fill in the details of your project.
Input 'Taskly' for the Product Name and 'com.your name or
website' for the Organization Identifier, then set Testing Sytem
and Storage to None as shown below:

--- Page 22 ---
Click Next, and you will be asked where to save the project. Feel
free to save the project on your Desktop or Document folders,
then check the Create Git Repository option if it’s not checked
yet:


--- Page 23 ---
If this is the first time you create a project in Xcode, you might
see an error that says Git Repository Creation Failed as
follows:
This is because Xcode requires Git author information to create
a repository. Click on the Fix…  button, then enter the Author
Name and Author Email info in the given text boxes:

--- Page 24 ---
Close the Source Control menu, Then open the Integrate menu
from the menu bar and select New Git Repository…  to
initialize Git repository on the project:
Once done, you will see the project loaded and the ContentView
file opened as follows:

--- Page 25 ---
You have successfully created your first iOS application project.
Well done!
Exploring Xcode
Now that you have used Xcode to generate an iOS application
starter project, let’s explore the interface a little to understand
how to navigate around:

--- Page 26 ---
The Xcode interface can be divided into 5 parts:
 ▪ The toolbar at the top (1) is where you build and run the
application, select the device to run the application, and
show the current status of the application (building, ready,
installing, .etc)
 ▪ The left sidebar (2) is the Navigator area where you can
navigate around your project files, source control changes,
monitoring active application, and more
 ▪ The center (3) is the Editor area where you edit the source
code, modify user interface and several options related to the
project
 ▪ The right sidebar (4) is the Inspector area, and it will show
attributes and options related to the file currently opened in
the editor area

--- Page 27 ---
 ▪ The bottom bar (5) is the Debug area, and here you will see
logs related to the application when you run it
You will mostly use the toolbar, navigator, and editor areas
when developing iOS application.
The navigator and the editor are quite obvious in how they
work, so let’s explore the toolbar a little:
From left to right, there are 10 points of interest in the toolbar:
1. The button on the far left toggles the navigator area
2. The stop button causes Xcode to stop monitoring the
currently running application. It’s only shown when the
application is running
3. The run button will build and run the application
4. Shows the active source control branch. Click to change
5. Selects the project to build
6. Selects the device to run the project on
7. Displays the status of the project (building, running,
error, .etc)
8. Opens the Xcode cloud menu to build, test, and
distribute your application
9. Shows the resources in Xcode library
10. Toggles the inspector area

--- Page 28 ---
The toolbar alone might seem overwhelming, but don’t worry
as you don’t need to remember all of this features in detail.
The most important part is the device selection button (6) and
then the run (3) and stop (2) button. The rest of the menus will
be used only sparingly.
Finally, note that Xcode hides file extensions from the navigator
sidebar by default. If you want Xcode to display the file
extensions, select Xcode > Settings from the topbar:

--- Page 29 ---
In the General tab, change File Extensions to Show All as
shown below:

--- Page 30 ---
This will show the extensions for all files in your project.
Next, let’s see how you can run the application on a simulator.
Running Apps in the Simulator
When the iOS simulator has finished downloading, you can try
to run the application on a virtual iPhone.
On the device selection toolbar, you can select any of the iPhone
model. But if you want the home button, you need to use iPhone
SE simulator:

--- Page 31 ---
Next, click on the run button or press the shortcut Command + R
to build the app and run the simulator. Once the simulator is
ready, Xcode automatically installs the application on the
simulator and open it.
If all is running well, you should see the following screen:

--- Page 32 ---
The 'Hello, world!' text is the default text generated by Xcode.
This means the application is successfully installed and
executed on the simulator.
Running Apps in Physical iPhone Devices
While you can follow along with this book using only the
simulator, having an iOS device for testing is recommended as

--- Page 33 ---
the simulator is not able to simulate the iPhone hardware (like
camera and sensor data) and software (like Bluetooth and
Apple Pay) components.
You might use a real device for testing in the future anyway, so
let’s learn how to perform one right now.
The first thing you need to do is to enable Developer Mode in
your iPhone. You need to open the Settings > Privacy &
Security > Developer Mode to enable it:

--- Page 34 ---
You will be prompted to restart your device. After restarting,
you will receive another confirmation prompt to enable
Developer Mode. Tap Turn On.
Next, you need to connect your iPhone with your Mac using the
iPhone charging cable.

--- Page 35 ---
The mac will show the Allow accessory to connect? alert, so
click Allow. The iPhone will also show the Trust This
Computer? alert. you need to tap Trust and enter your phone
passcode.
You should see your phone in the device selection menu on the
toolbar as follows:
Click on your phone, then run the application. You should get
an Xcode error saying "Build Failed" because you haven’t added
a development team for the project yet.
Click on the (x) button beside the status view, then click on the
error tab on the left sidebar. You can then add your Apple ID by
clicking the Add account…  button:

--- Page 36 ---
Once you added your Apple ID, close the Accounts window, and
you should be able to select the ID as your project development
team like this:
Now that the team is added, run the application again. You
might see an alert saying codesign wants to access key Apple
Development from the keychain. Enter your Mac password to
enable it:


--- Page 37 ---
After that, you might get a Copying shared cache symbols from
the phone notification like this:
Just wait until the copying and processing shared cache
symbols are complete.
Now, you’ll get an error because Xcode failed to ask the iPhone
to open the application as shown here:
The iPhone needs to trust the development key to open the
application. Follow the instructions to open the Settings > VPN
& Device Management menu and trust the development key:

--- Page 38 ---
Now everything should be ready. Click the run button again.
This time, you should see the "Hello, world!" text on your phone
screen.
You have successfully run the application on an iOS device.
Congratulations!
Summary
The project created in this chapter can be found in the
Chapter02 folder.
In this chapter, you’ve managed to creat your first iOS
application using Xcode, explored the important parts of the
Xcode interface, and then run the application using both a
simulator and a physical device.

--- Page 39 ---
In the next chapter, we’re going to start exploring Swift, the
programming language used to develop iOS applications.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 40 ---
SECTION 1: SWIFT
PROGRAMMING BASICS
Welcome to Section 1! In this part, you will start learning the
fundamentals of Swift, the programming language used in
building iOS apps.
You will see how to perform general programming tasks, such
as creating and storing variables, executing conditional
statements and loops, and defining functions.
This section includes the following chapters:
 ▪ Chapter 3: Swift Introduction: Playground and Variables
 ▪ Chapter 4: Swift Basic Data Types and Operators
 
▪
 
Chapter 5: Control Flow in Swift
 
▪
 
Chapter 6: Swift Collections

--- Page 41 ---
 
▪
 
Chapter 7: Swift Function and Closure
 ▪ Chapter 8: Swift Objects - Class and Structure
 ▪ Chapter 9: Enumeration, Protocol, and Extension
 ▪ Chapter 10: Swift Libraries and Concurrency
Please note that we won’t dive really deep into Swift as that
topic can be a book of its own. Instead, we’re going to explore
the most used Swift features when developing iOS applications
only.
If you’re already familiar with Swift, you can skip ahead to
Section 2 to start building iOS apps.
By the end of this part, you will know how to write instructions
in Swift to execute a wide range of general programming tasks.
From managing data with variables and collections to
controlling logic flow with conditionals and loops.
You’ll also be able to create and use functions, work with
advanced concepts like classes, structs, and generics, and
handle errors effectively.
With these foundational skills, you will be well-prepared to
start building iOS apps with clean and efficient code.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 42 ---
CHAPTER 3: SWIFT PLAYGROUND
AND VARIABLES
Swift is a general-purpose programming language that was
introduced in June 2014 at Apple’s World Wide Developer
Conference (WWDC). This programming language can be used
for creating applications in Apple operating systems, including
iOS, macOS, watchOS, tvOS, and visionOS.
Swift was designed to provide developers with a powerful and
efficient toolset to build high-performance applications tailored
for Apple’s hardware and software environments.
Before Swift, you need to learn Objective-C to build applications
for Apple devices. Swift can work seamlessly with Objective-C
code, so developers can leave legacy code in Objective-C while
building new features in Swift.
The key features of Swift are as follows:
Safety: Swift has strong typing and error-handling features that
help prevent common programming mistakes. For example, it
reduces the chances of null pointer exceptions and encourages
the use of optionals to handle missing values more explicitly.

--- Page 43 ---
Performance: Swift was designed to be highly performant,
with a focus on fast execution. It uses a modern compiler that
translates Swift code into optimized machine code, achieving
performance on par with or better than Objective-C.
Ease of Use: The language introduces a more readable and
clean syntax, removing many of the complexities of Objective-C.
This helps new developers learn the language more quickly and
makes code easier to write and maintain.
Interoperability: From the beginning, Swift was designed to
work seamlessly alongside Objective-C. Developers can use both
languages in the same project, allowing for a gradual transition
to Swift from older Objective-C codebases.
In 2015, Apple made Swift open source, allowing the developer
community to contribute and help in leading its development.
Creating a Swift Playground
To learn Swift effectively, you need to create a Swift playground
in Xcode.
A Swift playground is a separate development environment
where you can write Swift code and see its results quickly. In
the playground, you don’t need to create a whole new project
and run the compilation process just to see the output of your
Swift code.
From the Xcode menu bar, select File > New > Playground…  to
create a new playground:

--- Page 44 ---
In the template selection, select iOS, and then select Blank.
Name the playground anything you want, such as
'MyPlayground' and save the file in any location:
You will be presented with a simple code playground as follows:

--- Page 45 ---
The playground is similar to the Xcode project interface, with a
few differences.
If you didn’t see the left sidebar, you can click on the left
sidebar button (1) to enable it. The playground file has two
groups: sources and resources.
In the sources group, you can create another Swift file to
separate your code. In the resources group, you can put any
kind of file (images, text, .etc) to interact with your code.
The playground should automatically run your code, but if not,
you can click on the 'Run' icon shown at the bottom of the editor
area (2) and the results will be shown on the right side (3) as
shown above.
You can also long-click on the 'Run' icon to control whether to
run the playground manually or automatically:

--- Page 46 ---
Now that the playground is created, let’s continue with learning
Swift variables.
Swift Variables
In programming, a variable is simply a name that you give to a
value so that you can access that value later.
You can think of a variable as a label that can be tagged to a
certain value, so you can refer to that value using the label.
To declare a variable in Swift, you need to type the keyword var
followed by the variable name.
In the Swift playground file, there’s a variable named greeting
that gets assigned the 'Hello, playground' string:
var greeting = "Hello, playground"
You can change the value held by the greeting variable by re-
assigning another value to it as follows:
var greeting = "Hello, playground"
greeting = "Learning Swift!"

--- Page 47 ---
Variables are commonly used to reference data so that you can
use the same data multiple times in your program.
Next, let’s see some rules for naming variables in Swift.
Variable Naming
Swift has a few variable naming rules that you need to know to
avoid errors.
Variable names can only contain alphabet letters, numbers, and
underscores (_). This means you can name your variable
message, message_1, or messageOne.
The first character of the variable name must not be a number.
message_1 is okay. 1_message is not.
You can’t use reserved keywords such as var because they are
used by Swift to do certain things. There are many other
keywords used by Swift that you’ll learn in the following
sections such as if, for, and struct.
Variable names are case-sensitive, which means Message,
MESSAGE, and message can be used to create three different
variables:
var MESSAGE = "a"var Message = "a"var message = "a"
But of course it looks unprofessional. It’s also not recommended
to use similar names as it causes confusion.

--- Page 48 ---
Sometimes, you need more than one word to declare a variable
name. You need to use a camelCase style as shown below:
var myAwesomeVariable = ""
Camel case is a naming convention where the first letter of the
variable is lowercase, and each subsequent word starts with an
uppercase letter.
There’s also the snake case naming convention that uses an
underscore to separate words. Here’s an example:
var my_awesome_variable = ""
While snake case won’t cause any error, Swift community
strongly discourages the use of snake case, so let’s just stick with
the camel case.
Constant Variables
There are times when you need to store a value that must not
be changed in a variable.
A constant variable is a variable that doesn’t change its value as
long as the program is running. In Swift, a constant variable is
declared using the let keyword.
The following shows how to declare 2 constants in Swift:
let fileSizeLimit = 2000let maxSpeed = 300
If you try to reassign a constant variable, you’ll get an error:
let fileSizeLimit = 2000

--- Page 49 ---
fileSizeLimit = 3000 // Error: 'fileSizeLimit' is a 'let' constant
The naming convention for a constant is the same as regular
variables. You need to use the camelCase format.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter03 folder
of the source code.
In this chapter, you’ve learned about the key features of Swift,
created a playground where you can experiment with Swift
code, and learned how to declare variables and constants.
In the next chapter, you will learn about Swift data types. See
you there!
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 50 ---
CHAPTER 4: SWIFT BASIC DATA
TYPES AND OPERATORS
Data types are simply definitions for different types of data
known to a programming language.
A data type contains rules about what you can and can’t do
with that data.
To show you an easy example, I’m sure you agree that 2 + 2 =
4?
Well, Swift also agrees with that:
var number = 2 + 2  // number equals 4
But what if you try to add a number to letters as shown below?
var number = 2 + "ABC"
In Swift, you’ll get an error that says Binary operator '+' cannot
be applied to operands of type 'Int' and 'String'.
The error means that the addition + operator can’t be used with
operands of 2 (which is an Int type) and "ABC" (which is a

--- Page 51 ---
String type)
Data types are associated with the variables you write in your
code, and Swift uses these types to know how to handle the
instructions you give to it.
When you assign a value or data to a variable, the type of that
data is attached to the variable.
To see the data type of the variable, you need to hold the option
key and click on the variable name as follows:
Here, you can see that the type of the greeting variable is a
String.
In this chapter, you’re going to learn basic data types that Swift
has:
 
▪
 
Strings
 
▪
Numbers

--- Page 52 ---
 
 
▪
 
Boolean
String Types
String data types represent a sequence of characters. There are
two string types available in Swift: Character and String.
The Character type can only hold a single character, while
String type can hold as many sequence of characters as you
need.
You can also embed variables in a string by using the \
(variableName) syntax as follows:
var myName = "Nathan"
var greeting = "Hello, \(myName)!" // "Hello, Nathan!"
var myScore = 8
var message = "Your score is \(myScore)" // "Your score is 8"
The \(variableName) syntax allows you to create a string from
existing variables.
Number Types
Number data types represent numbers. There are 3 number
types in Swift:

--- Page 53 ---
 ▪ Int for integer (whole) numbers: 1, 2, 3, .etc
 ▪ Float for floating (decimal) numbers: 1.05, 2.47, 3.99, .etc
 ▪ Double for large decimal numbers: 1.000000000009,
2.765463721209, .etc
The only difference between Float and Double is that Double can
hold up to 15 decimal numbers, while Float only 6.
Boolean Type
The boolean type represents a simple yes/no logical value.
There’s only one boolean type in Swift, which is Bool, and it can
only have either true or false as its value:
var isCompleted = true
isCompleted = false
Type Inference and Type Annotation
When you declare and assign a value to a variable, Swift will
figure out the data type of the variable from the value you give
to the variable.
This process is known as type inference:
var greeting = "Hello, world!" // Inferred as String
var myInteger = 2 // Inferred as Int
var myDouble = 2.0 // Inferred as Double
var myBoolean = true // Inferred as Bool

--- Page 54 ---
In the code above, Swift works out the types of the variables
from the given value.
You can also let Swift know the type of the variable by using
type annotation.
Type annotation allows you to manually specify the type of a
variable using the syntax :Type after the variable name:
var greeting: String = "Hello, world!"
When a variable is annotated, you can declare that variable
without initial value like this:
var greetings: String  // Variable has no initial value
greetings = "Hello!" // Value assigned after declaration
You can also override the type inferred by Swift. For example,
you might want to make a Double type variable instead of an Int
type:
var number = 4 // Swift will infer the type as Int
var anotherNumber: Double = 4 // Force the variable to be Double
Type annotation gives you control over the type of the variable.
It also enables you to declare a variable for future use without
immediately assigning a value.
The Any Type
In Swift, The Any type is used to represent values of any type.
When you create a variable of type Any, you remove the data
type restrictions provided by Swift.

--- Page 55 ---
Consider the following example:
var username: Any = "Nathan"
username = 5
When using the Any type, Swift won’t complain when you
change a string into an integer.
The use of Any is discouraged in Swift because it’s better to be
specific about the type you expect to have in your code.
Unless you have a strong reason, you really shouldn’t use the
Any type in your code.
Optional Type and nil
An optional is an extra type that enables a variable to have nil
value, which represents nothing, or no value.
To help you understand optionals, first write the following code
in the playground:
var secretString: String
print(secretString)
Here, we will get an error saying Variable 'secretString' used
before being initialized because we are trying to use the
secretString variable when calling the print() function, but we
haven’t assigned a value to the variable yet.
The print() function simply prints the value of the variable you
passed into it. We will learn more about functions in Chapter 7.
For now, we will focus on the variable.

--- Page 56 ---
Let’s add a question mark ? next to the variable type as follows:
var secretString: String? // nil
print(secretString)
Now the secretString variable is optional and gets assigned the
nil value by default. The error is replaced with a warning that
says the expression String? is coerced to Any.
To see the print() result, you need to open the debug area as
follows:
In Swift, optional types are automatically converted to Any
when passed to the print() function.
The warning simply tells you that the secretString variable is
not treated as an optional string.
To fix this warning, you can add a default value to print using
the nil coalescing operator ?? like this:
var secretString: String?

--- Page 57 ---
print(secretString ?? "Hello, world!")
In the code above, "Hello, world!" will be printed when the
secretString value is nil, making the variable an optional.
The nil coalescing operator is one of many operators you can
use to operate on variables. Let’s learn more about them next.
Operators
Operators are symbols you can use to perform certain
operations on your data.
For example, the addition + operator can be used to join
multiple strings or add two numbers together:
var myString = "Good " + "Morning!" // Good Morning!
var myNumber = 10 + 5 // 15
Another operator is the nil coalescing operator, which allows
you to provide a default value when using an optional variable:
var myString: String?
print(myString ?? "Hello, world!")
In this section, we will explore all operators that Swift provides
for us. Since you’ve learned about data types previously,
learning operators should be relatively easy.
Arithmetic Operators
The arithmetic operators are used to perform mathematical
operations like additions and subtractions.

--- Page 58 ---
These operators are frequently used with number data types.
Here’s an example:
print(10 - 3) // 7
print(2 + 4) // 6
In total, there are 5 arithmetic operators in Swift:
// 1. Addition (+)// Returns the sum between the two operands
print(5 + 2) // 7
// 2. Subtraction (-)// Returns the difference between the two operandsprint(5 - 2) // 3
// 3. Multiplication (*) operator// Returns the multiplication between the two operandsprint(5 * 2) // 10
// 4. Division operator// Returns the sum between the two operandsprint(5 / 2) // 2
// 5. Remainder operator// Returns the remainder of the left operand after being divided by the rightoperandprint(5 % 2) // 1
These operators are pretty straightforward. As you’ve seen in
the previous section, the + operator can also be used on strings
data to merge multiple strings as one:
var message = "Hello " + "human!"print(message) // Hello human!
When you add a number and a string, Swift will complain
there’s an error:
var sum = "Hi " + 89 // Error

--- Page 59 ---
The addition operator can only add strings together, or
numbers of the same type.
If you try to add an Int and a Double, you also get an error:
var x: Double = 20var y: Int = 1
var sum = x + y// Binary operator '+' cannot be applied to operands of type 'Double' and 'Int'
To add numbers of different type, you can cast the Double type
to Int, or vice versa:
var x: Double = 20var y: Int = 1
var sum = x + Double(y) // 21
// orvar anotherSum = Int(x) + y // 21
Next, let’s explore the assignment operator.
The Assignment Operator
The next operator to learn is the assignment operator and its
variants, which is represented by the equal = sign.
In Swift, the assignment operator is used to assign data or a
value to a variable.
You’ve seen some examples of using the assignment operator
before, so here’s a reminder:
// Assign the string value "Hello" to the 'message' variablevar message = "Hello"

--- Page 60 ---
// Assign the boolean value true to the 'on' variablevar on = true
You may have noticed that the meaning of the equal sign in
programming differs from that in mathematics, and you are
correct!
The assignment operator isn’t used to compare if a number
equals another number in programming.
If you want to do that kind of comparison, then you need to use
the equal to == operator. We’ll learn more about comparison in
the next section.
Assignment operators can also be combined with arithmetic
operators, so that you can add or subtract values from the left
operand.
There are 6 types of assignment operators available in Swift.
Among these, only the standard assignment and the addition
assignment are used frequently. The rest is nice to know.
Standard Assignment Operator
The assignment operator is used to assign one value to another:
var x = 2
var y = 1
// Assign y to x
x = y
print(x) // 1
In the code above, the value of x becomes the value of y, which
is 1.

--- Page 61 ---
Addition Assignment Operator
The addition assignment is used to perform addition on the two
operands, and assign the result to the left operand:
var x = 2var y = 1
x += y
print(x) // 3
This is a shorter way to write x = x + y.
Subtraction Assignment Operator
The subtraction assignment is used to perform subtraction on
the two operands, and assign the result to the left operand:
var x = 2var y = 1
x -= yprint(x) // 1
This is a shorter way to write x = x - y.
Multiplication Assignment Operator
The multiplication assignment is used to perform multiplication
on the two operands, then assign the result to the left operand:
var x = 2var y = 3
x *= yprint(x) // 6
This is a shorter way to write x = x * y.

--- Page 62 ---
Division Assignment Operator
The division assignment is used to perform division on the two
operands, then assign the result to the left operand:
var x = 5var y = 2
x /= y
print(x) // 2
This is a shorter way to write x = x / y. Note that because x is
an Int type, the floating point .5 is omitted from the operation
result.
Remainder Assignment Operator
The remainder assignment is used to perform remainder on the
two operands, then assign the result to the left operand:
var x = 10
var y = 3
x %= y
print(x) // 1
This is a shorter way to write x = x % y.
Next, we’re going to take a look at the comparison operators.
The Comparison Operators
Comparison operators are used to compare two values. The
operators in this category will return a Bool value: either true
or false.

--- Page 63 ---
The following table shows all comparison operators available in
Swift:
Name Operation Example Meaning
Equal x == y Returns true if the operands are
equal
Not equal x != y Returns true if the operands are
not equal
Greater than x > y Returns true if the left operand is
greater than the right operand
Less than x < y Returns true if the left operand is
less than the right operand
Greater than or equal to x >= y Returns true if the left operand is
greater than or equal to the right
operand
Less than or equal to x ⇐  y Returns true if the left operand is
less than or equal to the right
operand
Here are some examples of using these operators:
print(9 == 9) // true
print(9 != 20) // true
print(2 > 10) // false
print(2 < 10) // true
print(5 >= 10) // false
print(10 <= 10) // true
The comparison operators can also be used to compare strings
like this:
print("ABC" == "ABC") // true

--- Page 64 ---
print("ABC" == "abc") // false
print("Z" == "A") // false
String comparisons are case-sensitive, as shown in the example
above.
Logical Operators
The logical operators are used to check whether one or more
expressions result in either true or false.
There are three logical operators that Swift has:
1. && AND operator - if any expression returns false, the
result is false
2. || OR operator - if any expression returns true, the
result is true
3. ! NOT operator - negates the expression, returning the
opposite.
These operators can only return Boolean values. For example,
you can determine whether '7 is greater than 2' and '5 is greater
than 4':
print(7 > 2 && 5 > 4) // true
Let’s have a little exercise. Try to run these statements on your
computer. Can you guess the results?
print(true && false)
print(false || false)

--- Page 65 ---
print(!true)
These logical operators will come in handy when you need to
assert that a specific requirement is fulfilled in your code.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter04 folder.
In this chapter, you’ve learned about the various data types
provided by Swift. Each data type has specific characteristics
that determine what you can and can’t do with the data.
You’ve also learned how to use operators to manipulate data in
simple ways. Of all the operators covered here, only a select few
are used frequently, while the rest are used in more specific
conditions.
At first, it might be difficult to memorize the operators you
need. The key to remembering them is practice.
The more code you write, the more you’ll internalize the
operators. Keep this chapter as a reference for when you need
to use them later.
Next, we’ll explore conditional statements in Swift.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 66 ---
CHAPTER 5: CONTROL FLOW IN
SWIFT
Up until now, the Swift code you’ve written is executed line by
line from top to bottom. But what if you want to run certain
lines of code only when a specific condition is met?
A computer program usually needs to take into account many
different conditions that can arise during execution.
This is similar to how a human makes decisions in their life. For
example, do you have money to cover the vacation to Japan? If
yes, go. If not, then save more money!
This is where control flow comes in. Control flow allows you to
selectively execute specific code based on the conditions that
occur when running the program.
By using control flows, you can define multiple paths a program
can take, depending on the conditions present in your program.
There are two types of control flows commonly provided by
Swift: conditionals and loops.

--- Page 67 ---
Conditional Flow
The conditional flow statement is used to run a piece of code
only under specific conditions.
There are two ways you can create a conditional flow:
1. if/else statement
2. switch/case statement
Let’s explore them next.
The if/else Conditional
The if statement allows you to create a program that runs only
if a specific condition is met.
The syntax for the if statement is as follows:
if *condition* {  // code to execute if condition is true}
Let’s see an example. Suppose you want to go on a vacation that
requires 5000 dollars.
Using the if statement and the greater than or equal to >=
operator, here’s how you can check if you have enough balance:
var balance = 7000
if balance >= 5000 {
    print("You have the money for this trip. Let's go!")
}

--- Page 68 ---
Run the code above once, and you’ll see the string printed in the
debug area as follows:
Now change the value of balance to 3000 and you’ll get no
response.
This happens because the code inside the if statement is only
executed when the condition is true.
After the if statement, you can write another line of code below
it as follows:
var balance = 7000
if balance >= 5000 {
    print("You have the money for this trip. Let's go!")}print("The end!")
The second print() call above will be executed no matter what
value you assign to the balance variable.
If you want it to execute only when the if condition is met, then
put the line inside the curly brackets as well:

--- Page 69 ---
var balance = 7000
if balance >= 5000 {    print("You have the money for this trip. Let's go!")    print("The end!")}
Next, suppose you need to run some code only when the if
statement condition is not fulfilled.
This is where the else statement comes in. See the following
example:
var balance = 7000
if balance >= 5000 {    print("You have the money for this trip. Let's go!")} else {    print("Sorry, not enough money. Save more!")
}print("The end!")
Now change the value of balance to be less than 5000, and you’ll
trigger the else block in the example.
Swift also has the else if statement which allows you to write
another condition to check should the previous if statement
condition isn’t met.
Consider the example below:
var balance = 4000
if balance > 5000 {
    print("You have the money for this trip. Let's go!")} else if balance > 3000 {    print("You only have enough money for a staycation")} else {    print("Sorry, not enough money. Save more!")}print("The end!")

--- Page 70 ---
When the balance amount is less than 5000, the else if
statement will check if the balance is more than 3000. If it does,
then the program will proceed to recommend you do a
staycation.
You can write as many else if statements as you need, and
each one will be executed only if the previous statement isn’t
met.
Together, the if/else statements allow you to execute different
blocks of code depending on the condition the program faces.
The switch/case Conditional
The switch statement is a part of core Swift syntax that allows
you to control the execution flow of your code.
It’s often thought of as an alternative to the if/else statement
that gives you more readable code, especially when you have
many different conditions to assess.
Here’s an example of a working switch statement. I will explain
the code below:
var age = 15
switch age {
case 10:
    print("Age is 10")
case 20:
    print("Age is 20")
default:
    print("Age is neither 10 or 20")
}

--- Page 71 ---
First, you need to define the condition to be evaluated by the
switch statement. In the example, the age variable is passed as
an argument for evaluation.
Then, you need to write the case values that the switch
statement will try to match with your expression.
The case value is immediately followed by a colon (:) to mark
the start of the case block:
case "apple":
The switch statement body is composed of two keywords:
 
▪
 
case keyword for starting a case block
 ▪ default keyword for running a piece of code when no
matching case is found.
When your expression finds a matching case, Swift will execute
the code following the case statement. When there’s no match,
the code in the default block will be executed.
Back to the previous example, Swift will print "Age is neither 10
or 20" because the age value doesn’t match any of the defined
cases:
var age = 15switch age {case 10:    print("Age is 10")case 20:    print("Age is 20")

--- Page 72 ---
p gdefault:    print("Age is neither 10 or 20") // This one will be printed}
When to Use Switch?
The rule of thumb when you consider between if and switch is
this:
 You only use switch when the code is
cumbersome to write using if
For example, let’s say you want to write a weekday name based
on the weekday number
Here’s how you can write it:
let weekdayNumber = 1
if (weekdayNumber == 0) {
  print("Sunday")
} else if (weekdayNumber == 1) {
  print("Monday")
} else if (weekdayNumber == 2) {
  print("Tuesday")
} else if (weekdayNumber == 3) {
  print("Wednesday")
} else if (weekdayNumber == 4) {
  print("Thursday")
} else if (weekdayNumber == 5) {
  print("Friday")
} else if (weekdayNumber == 6) {
  print("Saturday")
} else {
  print("The weekday number is invalid")
}
I don’t know about you, but the code above sure looks
cumbersome to me! Although there’s nothing wrong with the

--- Page 73 ---
code above, you can make it prettier with switch:
let weekdayNumber = 1
switch weekdayNumber {
  case 0:
    print("Sunday")
  case 1:
    print("Monday")
  case 2:
    print("Tuesday")
  case 3:
    print("Wednesday")
  case 4:
    print("Thursday")
  case 5:
    print("Friday")
  case 6:
    print("Saturday")
  default:
    print("The weekday number is invalid")
}
And that’s how the if and switch statements work. Next, let’s
take a look at the loop flow.
Loop Flow
As you program an application in Swift, you’ll often need to
write a piece of code that needs to be executed repeatedly.
Let’s say you want to write a program that prints the numbers 1
to 10 in the console. You can do it by calling print() 10 times
like this:
print(1)print(2)print(3)print(4)print(5)

--- Page 74 ---
// and so on..
This works, but there’s a better way to write this kind of
repetitive task.
A loop statement is another type of control flow statement used
to execute a block of code multiple times until a certain
condition is met.
There are two loop statements used in Swift:
 
▪
 
The for loop
 
▪
 
The while loop
Let’s learn how to use these loops in practice. But before that, I
need to introduce you to a special operator called the range
operators in Swift.
Range Operators
The range operators are shortcuts used to write a range of
number values. This operator is marked by three dots …  
between two numbers like this:
var myNumbers = 1...5
In the code above, the myNumbers variable contain a range of
numbers from 1 to 5.

--- Page 75 ---
By itself, the range operator is quite useless. It needs to be used
together with loop flow, which is what we will explore next.
The for/in Loop
The for/in loop (or just the for loop) is used to iterate over a
range of values and execute a piece of code in each step.
Here’s an example of the for/in loop in action:
for number in 1...10 {    print(number)}
The code inside the curly brackets after the for/in statement is
known as the body of the for statement, and it will be executed
in each iteration.
Instead of repeating yourself 10 times to print the numbers 1 to
10, you can use the for statement and the range operator as
shown above.
Once the loop is over, Swift will continue to execute any code
you write below the for body:
for number in 1...10 {    print(number)}
print("The for loop has ended")print("Continue code execution")

--- Page 76 ---
When to Use a for Loop and the Underscore
Operator
The for loop is useful when you know how many times you
need to execute a repetitive task.
For example, let’s say you’re writing a program to flip a coin.
You need to find how many times the coin lands on heads when
tossed 10 times. Here’s how you do it:
var heads = 0
var tails = 0
for _ in 1...10 {
    if Int.random(in: 0...1 ) == 1 {
        heads += 1
    } else {
        tails += 1
    }}
print("Tossed the coin ten times")
print("Number of heads: \(heads)")
print("Number of tails: \(tails)")
In the code above, the for loop will run 10 times. The
underscore _ operator is used to ignore the value generated by
the for loop.
In each run, the Int.random(in: 0 …  1 ) will generate a random
number between 0 and 1. When the random number is 1, the
heads variable is incremented by 1. When the random number
is 0, the tails variable will be incremented.
Because we know that we need to iterate 10 times, the for loop
is the most effective approach.

--- Page 77 ---
But suppose we change the goal to:
Find out how many times you need to flip a coin until it
lands on heads.
This time, we don’t know how many times we need to flip the
coin.
This is where we need to use the while loop, which we’re going
to explore next.
The while Loop
The while statement or while loop is used to run a block of code
as long as the condition evaluates to true.
You can define the condition and the statement for the loop as
follows:
while *condition* {    *code to run*}
Just like the for loop, the while loop is used to execute a piece of
code over and over again until it reaches the desired condition.
Here’s an example of the while loop in action:
var i = 0
while i < 6 {    print("The value of i = \(i)")    i += 1}
The output will be:

--- Page 78 ---
The value of i = 0
The value of i = 1
The value of i = 2
The value of i = 3
The value of i = 4
The value of i = 5
Here, the while loop will repeatedly print the value of i as long
as i is less than 6. In the while body, the value of i is
incremented by 1 until it reaches 6 and the loop terminates.
Keep in mind that you need to include a piece of code that
eventually turns the evaluating condition to false or the while
loop will be executed forever.
The example below will cause an infinite loop:
var i = 0
while i < 6 {    print("The value of i = \(i)")}
Because the value of i never changes, the while loop above will
go on forever!
The repeat-while Loop
The repeat-while loop is an alternative version of the while loop
that runs the body before the while statement. The syntax is as
follows:
repeat {    *code*} while *condition*

--- Page 79 ---
In this version, the loop body will be executed before the
condition is checked, ensuring that the loop will run at least
once.
Consider the example below:
var i = 1
repeat {    print("The value of i = \(i)")} while i < 1
Although the while condition evaluates to false in the code
above, the repeat body is still executed once because the check
comes after the execution.
When to Use a While Loop
Seeing that both while and for can be used for executing a piece
of code repeatedly, when should you use a while loop instead of
for?
An easy way to know when you should use while is when you
don’t know how many times you need to execute the code.
Back to the coin toss example, there’s one case that’s perfect for
a while loop:
Find out how many times you need to flip a coin until it
lands on heads.
Here’s how you handle the case using a while loop:
var flips = 0
var isHeads = false

--- Page 80 ---
while isHeads == false {
    flips += 1
    isHeads = Int.random(in: 0...1) == 1
}
print("It took \(flips) flips to land on heads.")
In the code above, the isHeads = Int.random(in: 0 …  1) == 1
simulates the flipping of a coin. When the result is true, it
means the coin landed on heads and the loop will exit.
You can run the code a few times to see different results. Here’s
one of those results:
It took 3 flips to land on heads.
Because you can’t know how many times you need to loop until
the coin lands on heads, you need to use a while loop instead of
a for loop.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter05 folder.
In this chapter, you’ve learned about the two types of control
flow available in Swift: the conditional flow and the loop flow.
Each type has two different ways of controlling the flow:
conditional has if/else and switch/case, while loop has for and
while statements.
The if and for statements are usually preferred over the switch
and while statements. You can think of switch and while as an
alternative syntax that you use when if and for isn’t suitable.

--- Page 81 ---
In the next chapter, you’re going to learn about collections, an
advanced data type in Swift. See you there!
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 82 ---
CHAPTER 6: SWIFT
COLLECTIONS
So far, you’ve seen how Swift data types are used to store a
specific type of value:
1. The String type is used to store one or many characters
2. The integer or Int type is used to store a whole number
3. The Double type is used to store numbers with floating
(decimal) points
4. The boolean or Bool type is used to store a boolean
value
But what if you want to group certain data in a single type?
Imagine you need to store information about a person’s name
and nationality.
You can create two different variables as follows:
var name = "John"var nationality = "American"

--- Page 83 ---
But there’s no way for you to let the computer know that these
variables are related. As far as Swift is concerned, they are two
separate variables that have no relation to each other.
To facilitate grouping data together, Swift provided the
collection data types.
Collections are simply containers that can be used to group any
data you have in one variable. Intrinsically, the data still has no
meaning to Swift as it’s up to you what data to put in one group.
By using collections, you can write efficient solutions to
programming problems. I will show you how later in this
chapter.
There are 4 collections available in Swift:
1. Array - an ordered collection of values
2. Tuple - a collection of fixed values
3. Set - an unordered collection of values
4. Dictionary - an unordered collection of key-value pairs
This chapter will explore how to work with these four
collection types. Let’s jump in!
Array
An array is a collection of related data (or values) put together
under one variable.

--- Page 84 ---
The following example shows one way you can store a person’s
firstName and lastName data:
var firstName = "Jane"
var lastName = "Dawson"
Instead of declaring two different variables, you can use an
array to put the data under one variable.
To declare an array, you need to use square brackets and
separate the values using a comma:
var person = ["Jane", "Dawson"]
This way, the variable person becomes an array containing two
values. The type of the variable will be an array of strings
[String] as shown below:
To access a value in an array, you need to write the array name
followed by the index (or position) of the value in square
brackets.
See the example below, it’s easy to understand:
var person = ["Jane", "Dawson"]

--- Page 85 ---
print(person[0]) // Jane
print(person[1]) // Dawson
The index number of an array starts from 0 and not 1. This is a
common rule in most programming languages that might trip
some beginners.
The second value in an array has an index of 1. Whenever you
want to get a value from an array, you can find the index
number by subtracting one from the value position.
// Index for the first value: 1-1 = 0person[0]
// Index for the second value: 2-1 = 1person[1]
// Index for the third value: 3-1 = 2person[2]
An array can hold a very large number of values, perhaps up to
a million values.
But don’t worry! I never see an array of more than a few tens,
and rarely approaching hundreds or thousands in my ten years
of programming.
Change, Add, or Remove Values From An
Array
Values in an array can be changed, added, or removed as
necessary.
The syntax for changing a value in an array is similar to the
syntax for accessing one. You only need to add the assignment
operator followed by the new value to replace the old one.

--- Page 86 ---
Here’s an example of changing an array values:
var numbers = [1, 2, 3]
// Change the valuesnumbers[0] = 10numbers[1] = 20numbers[2] = 30
The numbers [1, 2, 3] above is replaced with [10, 20, 30].
Values in an array can be changed as you see fit.
To add values, you need to call the append() function and pass
the value you want to add to the array:
var numbers = [1]
// Add values to the arraynumbers.append(2)numbers.append(50)
print(numbers)  // [1, 2, 50]
To delete values, you can use the remove() function and pass the
index of the value you want to delete to the at: parameter:
var numbers = [1, 55, 90]
// Delete the second value
numbers.remove(at: 1)
print(numbers)  // [1, 90]
Next, let’s look at how to iterate over an array.
Iterate Over an Array
To iterate over an array, you can use the for/in loop as shown
below:

--- Page 87 ---
var numbers = [11, 22, 33]
for number in numbers {    print(number)}
Output:
11
22
33
There are many more things that you can do with an array, but
we’re going to stop here for now and continue to explore the
tuple collection.
Tuple
A tuple is just like an array, with two differences:
1. Tuple can contain values of different types
2. You can’t add or remove values in a tuple after
declaration.
While an array is declared using square brackets [], a tuple is
declared using parentheses ().
For example, suppose you need to store the name (String) and
age (Int) of a person in your program. Here’s how you can do it:
var person = ("Nathan", 29)
To access values of a tuple, you need to use the . notation
followed by the index number of the value:

--- Page 88 ---
var person = ("Nathan", 29)
print(person.0) // Nathanprint(person.1) // 29
You can also provide a name for each value in the tuple like
this:
var person = (name: "Nathan", age: 29)
print(person.0)  // Nathanprint(person.1)  // 29
print(person.name)  // Nathanprint(person.age)  // 29
You can’t add or remove values from a tuple, but you can still
change it with another value of the same type:
var person = (name: "Nathan", age: 29)
person.name = "John" // Change tuple value
You also can’t directly iterate over a tuple without using a
workaround. This limitation exists because tuples have a fixed
length, and each value can have a different type.
Additionally, you can assign names to the values in a tuple,
which makes it unsuitable for iteration like arrays.
Set
A set is a collection of data that’s unique, which means you can’t
put the same value twice in a set.
To create a set, you need to annotate the variable with the Set
type as follows:

--- Page 89 ---
var mySet: Set = ["John", "Doe"]
Note how you need to use square brackets [] to wrap the values
of a set. This means if you don’t annotate the variable type,
Swift will infer the data as an array.
Also, a set must strictly have one type, so it can’t use the Any
type.
Change, Add, or Remove Values From A Set
A set doesn’t assign index numbers to its values, so you can’t
change values declared in a set.
But you can still add or remove values from a set using the
insert() and remove() functions:
var mySet: Set = ["John", "Doe"]
mySet.insert("Murray")
mySet.remove("Doe")
print(mySet)  // ["John", "Murray"]
A set is useful when you want to make sure that no duplicate
values are stored in your collection.
Iterate Over a Set
As with any other collection types, you can use the for/in loop
to iterate over a set:
var mySet: Set = ["John", "Doe"]
for value in mySet {    print(value)}

--- Page 90 ---
Because a set is unordered, you might see "Doe" gets printed
before "John".
Now that you’ve learned how a set works, let’s continue by
exploring a dictionary.
Dictionary
A dictionary is a collection of values like an array, but one
difference between a dictionary and an array is that a
dictionary requires you to put keys that refers to the values.
In array, the values can be accessed by their index numbers,
which is assigned to each value automatically when you add
them to the array.
By contrast, a dictionary values can be accessed by their keys,
which you specify when adding the values to the dictionary.
To declare a dictionary, you need to create a key-value pair
wrapped in square brackets [] as follows:
var myDictionary = ["firstName": "John", "lastName": "Doe"]
print(myDictionary)// ["firstName": "John", "lastName": "Doe"]
Each item in a dictionary has a key:value pair, and is separated
using a comma.
Change, Add, or Remove Values From A
Dictionary
You can also change, add, or remove values from a dictionary
as follows:

--- Page 91 ---
var myDictionary = ["firstName": "John", "lastName": "Doe"]
// change value in a specific keymyDictionary["firstName"] = "Lisa"
// add a new key-value pair to the dictionarymyDictionary["occupation"] = "Swift Engineer"
// delete a key-value pair from the dictionarymyDictionary.removeValue(forKey: "lastName")
print(myDictionary)// ["occupation": "Swift Engineer", "firstName": "Lisa"]
The keys of the dictionary must be of one type. If you use a
string as the key of the first value, then the next key must also
be a string.
You can use numbers as keys if you want to:
var myDictionary = [1: "John", 2: "Doe"]
Usually, a dictionary key is something that gives more context
to the value it holds. A key must also be unique, so you can’t use
the same key twice in a dictionary.
For example, if you have data about a person, you can use
dictionary keys such as firstName and lastName to help you
understand the context of the data. You can’t do this with an
array.
Iterate Over a Dictionary
To iterate over a dictionary, use the for/in loop as shown below:
var myDictionary = [1: "John", 2: "Doe"]
for (key, value) in myDictionary {    print("\(key) = \(value)")}

--- Page 92 ---
Output:
1 = John
2 = Doe
The for loop above returns a tuple containing the key and the
corresponding value for each iteration, which you can then use
inside the loop body.
Now you’ve learned how a dictionary works.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter06 folder.
In this chapter, you’ve learned about the four collection data
types available in Swift.
These collection types are used to group data of different types
in a single variable, allowing you to organize and manage
related data efficiently.
You’ll see how the collection types are useful as you progress
through this book and become more proficient with Swift.
In the next chapter, you will explore functions, which is a way
to group related instructions together. See you there!
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 93 ---
CHAPTER 7: SWIFT FUNCTION
AND CLOSURE
In programming, a function is simply a container (or a block) of
code used to perform a specific task.
The print() function that you’ve used many times in the
previous chapters is an example of a function provided by
Swift.
All programming languages come with many built-in functions
that can be used to help you build a program faster.
Some functions are specifically attached to a specific data type.
For example, the string type has the uppercased() function that
can be used to capitalize all letters in a string:
var name = "Nathan"
print(name.uppercased())  // NATHAN
But if you call the uppercased() function from another data type
such as an integer, you’ll get an error:
var age = 39

--- Page 94 ---
print(age.uppercased())
// Value of type 'Int' has no member 'uppercased'
Remember what we learned back in Chapter 4? The data type
specifies what you can and can’t do with the data.
In this case, the data type also determines what functions are
available for that data. The uppercased() function was added to
the String object and not the Int object, which caused the error.
A function that’s written attached to an object is also known as
a method. You’ll learn more about objects later in Chapter 8.
For now, just know that a function and a method are essentially
the same, except that a method always belongs to a specific
object.
Besides the built-in functions provided by Swift, you can also
create your own functions.
Creating And Calling a Function
The ability to create and call your own functions is one of the
most useful features in modern programming.
Creating a function starts with typing the func keyword
followed by the function name, a pair of round brackets, and
then a pair of curly brackets.
Here’s an example:
func greet() {
  // function body here
  print("Hello!")
}

--- Page 95 ---
To call a function, you need to specify the function name
followed by parentheses:
greet() // Hello!
When you call the function, Swift will look to that function
definition and perform all the instructions you write in the
function body.
A function simply packages a bunch of instructions together
into a block of code.
You can then run these instructions at any time by calling the
function name, saving you from having to repeat the
instructions again.
Function Parameters and Arguments
Parameters are variables used to accept inputs given when the
function is called.
You can specify parameters in the function header, inside the
parentheses.
The following example shows a function that has one
parameter called name, which is a String parameter:
func greet(name:String) {
  // function body
}
In Swift, function parameters must always be annotated.
How you use that name parameter inside the function is up to
you. For example, you can use the parameter inside the print()

--- Page 96 ---
function as follows:
func greet(name: String) {  print("Hello, \(name)")  print("Nice weather today, right?")}
Now whenever you need to call the greet() function, you need
to pass an input to fill in the name parameter.
The input you passed to fill a parameter is called an argument,
and here’s how to do it:
greet(name: "John")
You need to specify the argument name before the argument
value. The 'John' string inside the parentheses when calling the
greet() function will be passed as the name parameter.
Run the code to receive this output:
Hello, John
Nice weather today, right?
You can have more than one parameter when defining the
function, but you need to split each parameter with a comma as
follows:
func greet(name: String, weather: String) {  print("Hello, \(name)")  print("It's \(weather) today, right?")}
greet(name: "Nathan", weather: "rainy")
Output:
Hello, Nathan

--- Page 97 ---
It's rainy today, right?
When you specify two parameters in the function header, you
need to pass two arguments. Otherwise, you will get a 'Missing
argument for parameter' error.
In the next section, you’ll learn how to create default and
optional parameters, which allow you to call the function
without having to pass an argument to it.
But for now, I hope you see the convenience of having
parameters. They make your functions more adaptable and
reusable by taking different input values to cover a variety of
scenarios the function might have.
As shown in the example, the name and weather parameters
allow you to greet many different people in different weathers.
Whether sunny, rainy, or cloudy, just change the name and
weather arguments when you want to greet another person.
Default Parameters
When defining a function, you can set a default value for any
parameter in that function.
For example, the name parameter in the function below is a
default parameter:
func greet(name: String = "Nathan") {  print("Hello, \(name)")  print("Nice weather today, right?")}

--- Page 98 ---
Here, the default value 'Nathan' will be used when no value is
passed for the name parameter.
You can test this by calling the greet() function without an
argument as follows:
greet()greet(name: "Jack")
Output:
Hello, Nathan!
Nice weather today, right?
Hello, Jack!
Nice weather today, right?
Any function you define can have a mix of default and non-
default parameters.
Here’s another example of a function that has one default
parameter called name and one non-default parameter called
weather:
func greet(name: String = "Nathan", weather: String) {    print("Hello, \(name)")    print("It's \(weather) today, right?")}
greet(weather: "sunny")greet(name: "Jack", weather: "rainy")
Output:
Hello, Nathan
It's sunny today, right?
Hello, Jack
It's rainy today, right?

--- Page 99 ---
When you have a parameter with a default value, you don’t
need to pass an argument for that parameter when calling the
function.
Next, let’s take a look at optional parameters
Optional Parameters
You can also make a function parameter optional by adding the
question mark ? = nil syntax after the data type.
For example, let’s make the weather parameter optional:
func greet(name: String = "Nathan", weather: String? = nil) {
    print("Hello, \(name)")
    print("It's \(weather) today, right?")
}
Now because the weather is optional, you need to handle the
possibility of having nil for that parameter.
You can check with an if statement and print the second line
only when weather is not nil as follows:
func greet(name: String = "Nathan", weather: String? = nil) {    print("Hello, \(name)")    if weather != nil {        print("It's \(weather!) today, right?")    }}
Note there’s an exclamation ! mark added when embedding the
weather variable to the string. This is to tell Swift that you are
sure the weather value is not nil, as you have checked the
variable’s value with the if statement first.

--- Page 100 ---
Optional parameters are similar to default parameters, except
that they can accept nil as the default value.
The return Statement
A function can also have a return statement inside the code
block. A return statement is used to return a value back to the
caller.
For example, the following function returns the sum of two
values:
func sum(a: Int, b: Int) -> Int {
  return a + b
}
var result = sum(a: 3, b: 2)
print(result) // 5
First, note that there’s an arrow and type added in the header →
Int after the parentheses. This syntax is used to tell Swift about
the return type of your function.
Next, there’s a return statement before the a + b operation. This
statement returns the result value, which can be assigned to a
variable for further manipulations.
When Swift reaches the return statement, it skips further code
written inside the function block and goes back to where you
call the function.
The following function has two return statements:
func checkAge(age: Int) -> String {  if age > 18 {    return "You may get a car license"

--- Page 101 ---
  }  return "You can not get a car license yet"}
print(checkAge(age: 20))print(checkAge(age: 15))
Output:
You may get a car license
You can not get a car license yet
When we call the checkAge() function the first time, the value of
the age argument is greater than 18, so Swift executes the return
statement inside the if block.
The second time we called the function, the if condition wasn’t
met, so Swift executed the return statement under the if block
instead.
Variadic Parameter
A variadic parameter is a parameter that can accept any
number of values of a single type.
You can define a variadic parameter by adding three dots …  
after the parameter’s type.
Here’s an example of creating a function that has an Int type
variadic parameter:
func sumNumbers(args: Int...) {    var sum = args.reduce(0, +)    print(sum)}

--- Page 102 ---
When calling the sumNumbers() function, you can pass in as
many integers as you need:
sumNumbers(args: 1, 2)  // 3
sumNumbers(args: 1, 2, 3, 4)  // 10
sumNumbers(args: 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10)  // 60
Inside the function, a variadic parameter is converted to an
array, so you can use any array methods with the parameter. In
this case, the reduce() method is used to calculate the sum of
the integers.
Variadic parameters are useful when you want a function to
handle a flexible number of inputs, from zero to many.
A common example is Swift’s built-in print() function, which
uses a variadic parameter to print multiple values:
print("I", "Love", "Coding")print("Single value")
print()
Calling print() without adding any argument won’t cause an
error because the parameter is variadic.
You rarely need variadic parameters when creating a program
as you often know the exact number of inputs your function
will take.
They are only needed when the function needs to work with a
dynamic number of arguments without sacrificing flexibility.

--- Page 103 ---
The guard/else Statement
The guard/else statement is a conditional statement that’s used
in a function to validate the conditions of your program.
When the condition is valid, the program can progress further.
If the condition is invalid, you need to stop running the function
and write a return statement to move control back to the caller.
This statement is commonly used when you need to validate
data before processing it.
For example, suppose you have a function called submit() that
requires the username variable to be not empty. Here’s how you
do it:
func submit() {    var username = ""    guard !username.isEmpty else {        print("Username cannot be empty")        return    }
    print("Username validated")    print("Sending data for processing...")}
submit()
In the code above, the guard condition is the username must not
be an empty string.
When the guard condition isn’t met, the else condition will be
triggered, and Swift exits the function because of the return
statement.

--- Page 104 ---
If you assign any string to the username variable, then the guard
condition is fulfilled, and Swift can proceed inside the function.
Keep in mind that the else block is always required in guard
statements, unlike if statements where you can omit the else
block.
And that’s how the guard statement works. You’re going to use it
when building an iOS application in Section 2 later.
Variable Scope
Now that you’re learning about functions, it’s a good time to
talk about variable scope.
A variable declared inside a function can only be accessed from
that function. This is because that variable has a local scope.
On the other hand, a variable declared outside of any block is
known as a global variable because of its global scope.
These two scopes are important because when you try to access
a local variable outside of its scope, you’ll get an error. For
example:
func greet() {  var myString = "Hello World!"}
greet()print(myString)
When you run the code above, Swift responds with an error:
Cannot find 'myString' in scope

--- Page 105 ---
This is because the myString variable is declared inside the
greet() function, so you can’t access that variable outside of it.
It doesn’t matter even if you called that function before
accessing the variable.
Meanwhile, a global variable can be accessed from anywhere,
even inside a function:
var myString = "Hello World!"
func greet() {  myString = "Good Morning!"}
greet()print(myString) // Good Morning!
Here, the greet() function is able to access the myString variable
declared outside of it and change its value.
When we call the print() function, the value of myString has
already changed from its initial value.
Next, you can also define a local variable with the same name
as the global variable without overwriting it.
Here’s an example:
var myString = "Hello World!"
func greet() {
  var myString = "Morning!"
  print(myString)
}
greet()  // Morning!
print(myString) // Hello World!

--- Page 106 ---
When you call the greet() function, a local variable called
myString is assigned the string 'Morning!'.
Outside of the function, the global variable that’s also called
myString still exists, and the value isn’t changed.
Swift considers the local scope variable to be a different
variable. When you declare a variable with the same name
inside a function, any code inside the function will always refer
to the local variable.
Now of course this makes it confusing to read. It’s better to have
variables of different names outside and inside functions.
Closure Function
A closure function (or anonymous function) is simply a function
defined without a name.
The syntax of a closure function is as follows:
{ (*parameters*) -> *return type* in   *statements*}
A closure function can have parameters, a return type, and the
body of the function is written after the in keyword.
A closure can also be assigned to a variable like this:
var sum = { (x: Int, y: Int) -> Int in
    return x + y
}

--- Page 107 ---
Here, the sum variable is a function that accepts two arguments
(x and y) and then returns the result of the expression x + y.
You can call a closure just like you call a regular function, but
you don’t need to pass the argument name when calling a
closure:
var result = sum(2, 5)
print(result) // 7
Because a closure is anonymous, you can’t refer to the function
after declaration unless you assign it to a variable.
A closure is commonly used when you need to pass a function
as an argument of a function.
For example, the Array collection has a method named
sorted(by: ) that you can use to return a sorted array.
Suppose you want to sort an array of numbers. Here’s how you
do it:
var myNumbers = [10, 6, 9, 2, 3]
func ascending(v1: Int, v2: Int) -> Bool {
    return v1 < v2
}
var sortedNumbers = myNumbers.sorted(by: ascending)
print(sortedNumbers) // [2, 3, 6, 9, 10]
Here, you can see that the ascending function is passed as the
parameter of the sorted() function.

--- Page 108 ---
The sorted() function works by sending values two by two to
the by parameter function. To sort in ascending order, use the
less than < operator to compare the values.
While this is fine, we can optimize the code by passing a closure
to the by argument as follows:
var myNumbers = [10, 6, 9, 2, 3]
var sortedNumbers = myNumbers.sorted(by: { (v1: Int, v2: Int) -> Bool in    return v1 < v2})
print(sortedNumbers) // [2, 3, 6, 9, 10]
The closure above works, but you can shorten the code further
by removing the type annotation for the parameters and the
return value.
Swift can infer the parameter types from the arguments passed
by the caller (in this case, the sorted() method) and the return
value from the closure statement (which is Bool because of the
comparison v1 < v2)
var sortedNumbers = myNumbers.sorted(by: { v1, v2 in return v1 < v2 })
When a closure is the only argument to a function, you can
even remove the parentheses and the argument name.
This way, you write the closure directly next to the sorted
method:
var sortedNumbers = myNumbers.sorted { v1, v2 in return v1 < v2 }
Finally, Swift also provides a shorthand argument where you
can refer to the arguments by using the $number operator.

--- Page 109 ---
This might look a bit confusing at first:
var sortedNumbers = myNumbers.sorted { $0 < $1 }
In the closure function above, the $0 refers to the first
argument, and $1 refers to the second argument.
Everything is removed except the statement body, which is a
single line that returns either true or false.
Unless you want to use the ascending function again later,
creating a closure is recommended because you can make the
closure very concise as shown above.
Now creating a very short closure can be difficult to do for
beginners, so don’t worry if you’re not yet comfortable in
creating and reading one.
With time and practice, understanding and writing concise
closures will be second nature to you.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter07 folder.
A function enables you to group specific instructions together
so that you can perform a task without having to repeat the
instructions again.
Programming languages of any kind come with built-in
functions that you can use to perform specific tasks.
Some functions are available to call directly, such as the print()
function, while others are attached to specific objects, such as

--- Page 110 ---
the String.uppercased() or Array.sorted() functions.
When the built-in functions are not enough, you can create
your own functions to help you save time and avoid repetition.
In this chapter, you’ve learned how a function works in detail:
 ▪ How to create default, optional, and variadic parameters
 ▪ How to validate conditions in a function using guard/else
 ▪ How the variable scope works inside and outside a function
 
▪
 
What is a closure and how to create one
In the next chapter, you’re going to learn about objects, as well
as how to define object blueprints using classes and structs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 111 ---
CHAPTER 8: SWIFT OBJECTS -
CLASS AND STRUCTURE
In programming, an object is simply a group of properties
(variables) and methods (functions) created to accomplish a
certain goal.
An object is created from a class, and a class is a code block in
which you can define variables and methods associated with
that class.
You can think of a class as a blueprint that describes the general
traits and behaviors that the objects can have.
Classes in programming usually represent real-world things
and definitions. For example, a Vehicle class can represent
many machines that transport people and goods.
Objects you can create from the Vehicle class might be a car, a
truck, or a motorcycle.
By creating objects, you can create an encapsulated, modular
entity that can be reused and extended in many parts of your
code.

--- Page 112 ---
First, let’s learn how to create a class.
How to Create a Class
To create a class, you need to write the class keyword, followed
by the class name and curly brackets. For example:
class Vehicle {    // class body...}
This is similar to writing a function with the func keyword,
except you don’t need parentheses after the class name.
This Vehicle class is empty though, and an empty class is
useless, so let’s start adding things to the class body!
Let’s brainstorm a bit. As stated earlier, this class can represent
a car, a truck, or a motorcycle. What do these vehicles have in
common?
Well for one, they are of different vehicle types, so we might
define the vehicleType variable as a part of the class. These
vehicles would be created by different makers so let’s add a
maker variable in the class as well.
In the Vehicle class, you need to write a method named init()
as shown below :
class Vehicle {
    var vehicleType: String
    var maker: String
    init(vehicleType: String, maker: String){
        self.vehicleType = vehicleType
        self.maker = maker

--- Page 113 ---
    }
}
The init() method is a special method that gets called
automatically when you create an object of the associated class.
The name is short for "initialization", referring to the process of
initializing the object generated from the class.
The self keyword inside the init() method is used to refer to
the object properties. The line self.vehicleType = vehicleType
means you assign the value from the init parameter to the
property of the object.
Now that you have something written inside the class, let’s try
to create an object from the class.
In fact, we’re going to create two objects! Below the class
definition, write the following code:
class Vehicle {
    // ...
}
var myCar = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota")
var myBike = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Motorbike", maker: "Honda")
print(myCar.vehicleType) // Car
print(myBike.vehicleType) // Motorbike
In the above example, you’ve created two Vehicle objects: myCar
and myBike.
An object instance of the class is created when you call the class
using parentheses, which is similar to how you would call a
function.

--- Page 114 ---
When creating an object, you need to pass arguments that will
be used in the init() method. In this case, we’re passing
arguments for the vehicleType and maker properties.
The arguments are then assigned as properties of the object,
which you can access using the objectName.propertyName format.
A property is simply a variable attached to an object.
Next, let’s learn how to add methods to a class.
Defining Class Methods
A class method is simply a function defined inside a class. Any
method you define inside a class will be available for all objects
created from that class.
Back to the Vehicle class, let’s add a method named start() and
drive() as follows:
class Vehicle {
    var vehicleType: String
    var maker: String
    init(vehicleType: String, maker: String){
        self.vehicleType = vehicleType
        self.maker = maker
    }
    func start(){
        print("Starting the engine..")
        print("\(vehicleType) is on")
    }
    func drive(speed: Int){
        print("Driving \(maker) at \(speed) mph")
    }}

--- Page 115 ---
The start() function has no parameter, and the drive()
function has one parameter.
To call these methods, you need to use the
objectName.functionName() syntax as follows:
var myCar = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota")
myCar.start()myCar.drive(speed: 50)
Output:
Starting the engine..
Car is on
Driving Toyota at 50 mph
As you can see, an object derived from a class will have all the
properties and methods defined in that class.
With this, you’ve successfully created class methods and called
them.
Why Functions in a Class are Known as
Methods?
You might wonder, if a method is just a function in a class, then
why the additional term? It seems unnecessary.
It’s because the term method instantly implies that there’s a
class that this method belongs to.
When you call a function such as print, you can call the
function without specifying the object as follows:
print("Hello!")

--- Page 116 ---
But when you’re calling a method, you need to specify the
object from which you call the function, followed by a dot (.)
notation.
For example, when calling a String object method, you need to
use the String.upperCased() syntax:
var name = "Nathan"
name = name.uppercased()
The term method gives more information to you as the person
who works with the program, allowing you to differentiate
between "functions" and "functions in a class" without having
to see the source code.
The same also applies for properties. The term is used to
differentiate between "variables" and "variables in a class".
Class Inheritance
Inheritance is the ability to create a new class that extends an
existing class. This enables you to reuse the properties and
methods defined in the existing class.
For example, we’ve already defined a class named Vehicle
before. As we know, a vehicle can be many things: a car, a ship,
a truck, or even a rocket.
All these vehicles can have their own specific traits and
behaviors. For example, cars have four wheels and a specific
transmission setup.
Here’s an example of a Car class that you might write:

--- Page 117 ---
class Car {
    var vehicleType: String
    var maker: String
    var transmission: String
    var wheels: Int
    init(vehicleType: String, maker: String, transmission: String, wheels:
Int) {
        self.vehicleType = vehicleType
        self.maker = maker
        self.transmission = transmission
        self.wheels = wheels
    }
    func start() {
        print("Starting the engine..")
        print("\(vehicleType) is on")
    }
    func drive(speed: Int) {
        print("Driving \(maker) at \(speed) mph")
    }
    func getCarDetails() {
        print("Transmission: \(transmission)")
        print("Number of wheels: \(wheels)")
    }
}
Now notice how many chunks of code above are repeated from
the Vehicle class.
In the Vehicle class, we’ve already defined these properties and
methods:
1. vehicleType
2. maker
3. start()
4. drive()

--- Page 118 ---
Instead of writing the Car class from scratch, you can make Car
a subclass of the Vehicle class, allowing you to reuse the
properties and methods of the Vehicle class in the Car class.
The new class that inherits from a previous class is called a
subclass or child class, while the previous class is called a
superclass or a parent class
To create a subclass, you need to specify the name of the
superclass after the class name like this:
class Car: Vehicle {}
Here, we create a Car subclass from the Vehicle superclass.
Next, let’s define the properties unique to the Car class and add
the init() method. I will explain what it does afterward:
class Car: Vehicle {
    var transmission: String    var wheels: Int
    init(vehicleType: String, maker: String, transmission: String, wheels: Int){        self.transmission = transmission        self.wheels = wheels        super.init(vehicleType: vehicleType, maker: maker)    }
    func getCarDetails() {        print("Transmission: \(transmission)")        print("Number of wheels: \(wheels)")
    }}
In the code above, we initialize the new properties defined in
the Car class, which are wheels and transmission.

--- Page 119 ---
Next, we added the super.init() call to execute the init()
method from the superclass, which initializes the vehicleType
and maker properties.
Inside the child class, you can call properties and methods
written in the superclass by using the super keyword.
Alright, now you have a working subclass. Let’s initialize an
object from that class. The code below shows how you can call
properties and methods from the superclass:
var myCar = Car(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota", transmission: "MT",wheels: 4)
print(myCar.vehicleType)myCar.start()myCar.drive(40)myCar.getCarDetails()
Output:
Car
Starting the engine..
Car is on
Driving Toyota at 40 mph
Transmission: MT
Number of wheels: 4
Isn’t that amazing? You can reuse the properties and methods
of the superclass through the subclass as if they are one.
The reverse is not true, though. Any properties and methods
you defined in the subclass won’t be accessible from the
superclass. In fact, the superclass knows nothing about the
subclass.

--- Page 120 ---
When you create a Vehicle object, you can’t access the wheels
and transmission properties as they are not defined there.
Understanding Structures
There are actually two ways you can create an object in Swift:
by using a class or a structure, also known as struct.
To create a structure, you need to use the struct keyword as
follows:
struct Vehicle {    var vehicleType: String    var maker: String
    init(vehicleType: String, maker: String){        self.vehicleType = vehicleType        self.maker = maker    }
}
// Create objects from the structurevar myCar = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota")var myBike = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Motorbike", maker: "Honda")
As you can see above, a struct is very similar to a class, except
for two important differences:
1. A struct can’t be extended using inheritance
2. The initializer init() is optional in a struct
3. Classes are reference types, but structs are value types
This means you can’t extend a struct using another struct as
shown below:

--- Page 121 ---
struct Vehicle {
    // ...
}
struct Car: Vehicle {} // Error!
The init() method is also optional in a struct. Swift can
automatically assign parameters to the object instance when
you create one:
struct Vehicle {    var vehicleType: String    var maker: String}
var myCar = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota")var myBike = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Motorbike", maker: "Honda")
Next, we’re going to look at the differences between reference
types and value types.
In reference types, the variable refers to the same object
instance instead of having an independent copy.
Let me show you an example to make it clear. In the code
below, the variables a and b point to the same object instance:
class Vehicle {
    var vehicleType: String
    var maker: String
    init(vehicleType: String, maker: String){
        self.vehicleType = vehicleType
        self.maker = maker
    }
}
var a = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota")
var b = a
a.maker = "Honda"
print(b.maker) // Honda

--- Page 122 ---
We changed the maker property value of variable a, but the
b.maker value was also changed. This is because a and b refer to
the same object in the computer memory.
By contrast, a structure will copy the object when you assign it
to another variable as follows:
struct Vehicle {    var vehicleType: String    var maker: String
    init(vehicleType: String, maker: String){        self.vehicleType = vehicleType        self.maker = maker    }}
var a = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota")var b = a
a.maker = "Honda"print(b.maker) // Toyota
As you can see, the b.maker value is not changed when you
change the a.maker value.
Should You Use a Structure or Class?
Now that you know the differences between a structure and a
class, you may wonder which one you should use?
Generally, you should use structure unless you need the
inheritance feature of a class.
When developing iOS applications, more objects are defined
using structures instead of classes, because the inheritance
feature increases the complexity of your code and may
unintentionally produce bugs.

--- Page 123 ---
Swift also uses struct for defining all available data types. We
have a String, Int, Double, Bool, and many more structs.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter08 folder.
You just went through one of the most complex topics in Swift
programming. Congratulations!
In this chapter, You’ve learned how classes and structures allow
you to define the traits and behaviors of real-world objects.
They allow you to define the abilities and limitations of the
object you later initialize.
The object-oriented programming pattern with classes and
structures provide a robust foundation for writing code that is
reusable, maintainable, and extendable.
Structures are frequently used to represent the interface (view)
of iOS applications, as you will see in Section 2 later.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 124 ---
CHAPTER 9: ENUMERATION,
PROTOCOL, AND EXTENSION
In the last chapter, you’ve learned about objects, classes, and
structures.
There are just a few more features of Swift that you need to
familiarize yourself with before beginning iOS development.
In this chapter, you will explore three more features that can
help you create a modular and extendable program:
 ▪ Enumeration, another advanced data type that’s used to
group a fixed set of values together
 ▪ Protocol, an abstract blueprint that can be implemented by
classes and structures
 ▪ Extension, a way to add new functionality to existing types
Let’s jump in!

--- Page 125 ---
Swift Enumeration Type
Enumeration (or enum) is a custom data type that you can use
to define a fixed set of values.
To create an enum, you need to use the enum keyword, followed
by the enum name and curly brackets:
enum Direction {    // enum body...}
Inside the enum body, you define the enum values using the
case keyword like this:
enum Direction {    case north, south, east, west}
To access an enum value, you need to use the
enumName.enumValue syntax.
You can also assign enum values to variables as follows:
print(Direction.north) // north
print(Direction.south) // south
let north = Direction.northlet south = Direction.south
Enum values are objects, and the name you assign to the enum
is the type of that object.
Enum can also contain functions as shown below:
enum Direction {
    case north, south, east, west
    func description() -> String {        switch self {

--- Page 126 ---
        case .north:            return "You are heading North."        case .south:            return "You are heading South."        case .east:            return "You are heading East."        case .west:
            return "You are heading West."        }    }}
When you create a function in an enum, you can use a
switch/case conditional to check on the instance (self) value
and give the appropriate instructions.
The methods defined in an enum is directly available on the
enum objects:
print(Direction.north.description()) // You are heading North.print(Direction.south.description()) // You are heading South.
And that’s basically how enum works. While enum produces
objects like class and structure, enum is simpler because it has
no init() method, and you can’t initialize a custom object from
it.
The objects an enum can produce are already defined using the
case keyword as shown above.
Swift Protocol
A protocol is like a specification (or contract) for properties and
methods that can be implemented in a class, struct, or enum
that you have created.
When you create a protocol, you only write empty properties
and methods like this:

--- Page 127 ---
protocol Car {    var maker: String {get set}    var wheels: Int {get}
    func drive()}
Next, let’s add the Car protocol above to a Vehicle struct like
this:
struct Vehicle: Car { }
In Xcode, you’ll get an error saying the type Vehicle does not
conform to the protocol Car.
Click on the 'Fix' button to let Xcode generate the necessary
implementations:
Xcode will generate the implementation as follows:
struct Vehicle: Car {    var maker: String
    var wheels: Int
    func drive() {        code    }}
You only need to add instructions to the drive() method to
complete the implementation:
func drive() {
    print("The car is moving...")

--- Page 128 ---
p g}
And that’s how you add a protocol to a structure. You can do the
same for classes and enums.
One thing to note is that you can define the get/set attributes
for properties in the protocol:
protocol Car {
    var maker: String  {get set}
    var wheels: Int {get}
    func drive()
}
when you create a property with {get set} attribute, the
property must be readable and writeable.
If you create a property with {get} attribute, the property must
be readable, and writeable is optional.
This means a {get set} property must be a var, but a {get} only
property can be either a var or let property.
You can actually try this in the Vehicle struct. Changing maker to
let will cause an error, but changing wheels to let produce no
error:
struct Vehicle: Car {    let maker: String  // Error!
    let wheels: Int  // Valid
    func drive() {        print("The car is moving...")    }}

--- Page 129 ---
Finally, you can adopt more than one protocol on a single class,
structure, or enum.
The following example shows how the Calculate class
implements both Addition and Subtraction protocols. Note that
you can specify the function return type in protocols:
protocol Addition {
    func addition() -> Int
}
protocol Subtraction {
    func subtraction() -> Int
}
class Calculate: Addition, Subtraction {
    var a: Int
    var b: Int
    init(a: Int, b: Int) {
        self.a = a
        self.b = b
    }
    func addition() -> Int {
        return a + b
    }
    func subtraction() -> Int {
        return a - b
    }
}
var calc = Calculate(a:10, b:3)
print(calc.addition())  // 13
print(calc.subtraction())  // 7
To implement multiple protocols, just separate the protocol
names using a comma as shown above.

--- Page 130 ---
Swift Extension
As the name implies, an extension provides a way to extend the
properties and methods of an object.
An extension can be applied to a class, struct, or enum. Here’s
an example of extending the Vehicle struct:
struct Vehicle {    var vehicleType: String    var maker: String}
extension Vehicle {    func start() {        print("Starting the engine...")        print("Engine started")    }}
The start() method is now available for all instances of the
Vehicle struct:
var myCar = Vehicle(vehicleType: "Car", maker: "Toyota")myCar.start()
Extensions provide a way to organize your code for clarity. It
also enables you to modify existing objects even when you don’t
have access to the source code.
For example, you can extend the String struct, from which the
String objects are created:
extension String {
    func greet() {
        print("Hello!")
    }
}
var myString = ""

--- Page 131 ---
myString.greet() // Hello!
An extension can contain methods and computed properties,
but it can’t have stored properties.
A stored property is the one you have used all along, where you
assign values to the property using the assignment = operator:
struct Vehicle {    var vehicleType: String    var maker: String}
extension Vehicle {    var color: String = "Red" // Error!}
A computer property is a property where the value is calculated
and returned instead of assigned.
To create a calculated property, you need to add curly brackets
after the property type. Here’s how to change the color
property from stored to calculated:
extension Vehicle {
    var color: String {
        "Red"
    }}
Finally, you can also use properties defined in the original class,
struct, or enum in the extension:
extension Vehicle {    var color: String {        "Red"    }
    var description: String {        "The \(vehicleType) was made by \(maker)"

--- Page 132 ---
    }}
Here, the description computed property used the vehicleType
and maker properties defined in the Vehicle struct.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter09 folder.
In this chapter, you’ve learned more Swift features that can be
used to create modular and extendable programs.
Enumeration enables you to group related constants together
and add dynamic methods that change depending on the
selected enum value.
Protocol acts as a specification or contract for properties and
methods that must be implemented by adopting classes, structs,
or enums. You can also adopt more than one protocol at a time.
Extension enables you to add new functionality to existing
types, including methods and computed properties. It allows
you to organize code and enhance types without modifying
their original implementation.
These three features are used commonly in iOS development,
especially protocols and extensions.
Next, we’re going to take a look into Swift libraries and
concurrency features.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 133 ---
CHAPTER 10: SWIFT LIBRARIES
AND CONCURRENCY
There are just two more Swift concepts that you need to
familiarize yourself with before starting iOS development:
 
▪
 
Swift standard and custom libraries
 
▪
 
Swift concurrency
These two concepts are frequently required when you develop
advanced iOS applications. Let’s get to it.
Exploring Swift Libraries
In programming, a library is a collection of pre-written code
that developers can use to perform common tasks without
having to write the code from scratch.

--- Page 134 ---
Libraries typically contain functions, classes, and methods that
you can use to solve specific problems or perform specific
operations.
The Swift programming language comes with many libraries
that help you perform common programming tasks.
For example, the Foundation library in Swift contains many
functions and classes used to handle common use cases, such as
creating a Date object, which represents a specific point in time.
To use Swift libraries, you need to import them into your file
first:
import Foundation
var date = Date()
print(date) // 2024-09-19 10:42:16 +0000
print(date.formatted(date: .abbreviated, time: .omitted)) // 19 Sep 2024
As shown above, the Date object also comes with the formatted()
method, which allows you to generate a localized date string.
Another library that’s commonly used in Swift is SwiftUI, a
declarative framework for building user interfaces for Apple
devices:
import SwiftUI
You’ll learn more about SwiftUI in Section 2. For now, let’s see
how you can add a custom Swift library to your Xcode project.

--- Page 135 ---
Adding a Custom Swift Library
Besides the libraries included in Swift, there are many custom
libraries developed by Swift developers around the world.
To use these external libraries, you have to import them into
your project first.
Now importing libraries can’t be done in Swift regular
playgrounds. Instead, you need to do it in a regular project or
an "app" playground.
To create an app playground, go to File > New > Project…  then
select App Playground from the iOS tab:
You will be asked to enter the App Name for the app
playground. Enter 'AppPlayground' or any other name you
want.

--- Page 136 ---
The app playground will be generated and you will have two
Swift files in it: MyApp and ContentView
Now go to File > Add Package Dependencies…  to add external
libraries to the app playground:
Here, you will be presented with packages containing libraries
developed by Apple:
You can read the package descriptions to see what it does.

--- Page 137 ---
Alternatively, you can also look for packages developed by
other developers, especially those hosted on GitHub.
For demonstration, let’s add a star rating view library that can
be found here:
https://github.com/magickworx/StarRatingViewSwiftUI
This library enables you to create a star-shaped buttons. Users
can tap the stars to give their ratings.
Copy the GitHub URL of the package and paste it into the Swift
package manager, then click Add Package as follows:
Xcode will then ask you where to add the StarRatingViewSwiftUI
package:

--- Page 138 ---
Just click Add Package since the playground only has one
destination anyway.
Once finished, you will see the package listed on the Navigator
sidebar as Package Dependencies:

--- Page 139 ---
To use it in the project, you need to import it in your Swift file
first:
import SwiftUI
import StarRatingViewSwiftUI
Next, create a state variable that will keep track of the rating
given by the user. Let’s name this variable score:

--- Page 140 ---
struct ContentView: View {
    @State var score: Float = 0
    var body: some View {        VStack {            // ...        }
    }}
The @State attribute is used to tell SwiftUI to update the view
when the property value changes.
Now inside the VStack block, create a StarRatingView under the
Text() object as follows:
StarRatingView(rating: $score)    .frame(width: 100, height: 30)
The StarRatingView() is a struct that has the rating property.
The rating property is bound to the score variable with the
$score syntax.
The .frame() method then sets the size of the view, putting the
width at 100 points and height at 30 points.
Now run the application in the simulator or physical device,
and you can test the rating view by tapping it.
The star ratings should respond to your tap by filling the star
icons:

--- Page 141 ---
Because of the @State attribute, the view is refreshed every time
you click on the stars.
And that’s how you add an external library to an Xcode project.
There are many useful libraries available on the internet for
you to use freely in your iOS project like the star rating view.
I will show you one more useful library later in Section 2.
Understanding Swift Concurrency
In programming, concurrency is the ability to run more than
one process simultaneously.
By enabling concurrency, the program you create can run
multiple processes at the same time, making the program more
efficient.
To show you an example, suppose you need to create a program
that can fetch data from two different resources.
Let’s say you need to fetch user data and news data. Here’s how
you might implement the fetching process in Swift functions:

--- Page 142 ---
import Foundation
// A function to fetch weather datafunc fetchUser() -> String {    print("Fetching user data...")
    sleep(3) // 3 seconds
    print("User fetched")    return "Name: Nathan"}
// A function to fetch news headlinesfunc fetchNews() -> String {    print("Fetching the latest news...")
    sleep(2) // 2 seconds
    print("News fetched")    return "iOS 18 is here!"}
The sleep() function is part of the Foundation library, and it
can be used to stop the processing of a function for X seconds.
This simulates the delay you might get when fetching data from
a server over the internet.
Next, you call and store the result of both functions in a
variable, then print them out:
// Process and print resultslet userResult = fetchUser()let newsResult = fetchNews()
print("User: \(userResult)")print("News: \(newsResult)")
To get a feel for the delay, try to run the code above on your
computer. You will see the following output appears one by one:
Fetching user data...
User fetched
Fetching the latest news...

--- Page 143 ---
News fetched
User: Name: Nathan
News: iOS 18 is here!
Here, you may notice how the program fetches the latest news
after the user data has been fetched. Fetching user data
requires 3 seconds, and fetching the news takes 2 seconds. This
means we need 5 seconds to complete both functions.
While there’s nothing wrong with the code above, we can
optimize the process by running both fetch processes at the
same time.
This is where we can use Swift concurrency feature. First, you
need to add the async notation to the functions as shown below:
func fetchUser() async -> String {
    // ...
}
func fetchNews() async -> String {
    // ...
}
The async keyword is short for asynchronous. By using the
keyword, you are telling Swift that the function can run
concurrently, allowing it to pause and resume without blocking
the running process.
When you call an async function, you need to add the await
keyword in front of the function call:
let userResult = await fetchUser()let newsResult = await fetchNews()

--- Page 144 ---
The await keyword tells Swift to pause further execution of the
code and wait for the asynchronous function to finish before
continuing.
But wait, doesn’t this mean Swift is still waiting for each
function to complete before moving on to the next one?
You’re absolutely right! That’s because we haven’t introduced
the Task block into the program yet.
In Swift, a Task is a wrapper that you can use to run code
concurrently. Let’s add it in front of the function call as follows:
let userTask = Task { await fetchUser() }
let newsTask = Task { await fetchNews() }
Also notice that the variable names are changed to userTask and
newsTask. This is because the Task block returns a Task object
instead of the function result.
To actually get the value returned by the functions, you need to
access the value property of the Task object.
You also need to use await to wait until the task is completed as
shown below:
let userTask = Task { await fetchUser() }let newsTask = Task { await fetchNews() }
let userResult = await userTask.valuelet newsResult = await newsTask.value
// Process and print resultsprint("User: \(userResult)")print("News: \(newsResult)")

--- Page 145 ---
The code is now complete, but if you try to run it, you’ll get an
error as follows:
Playground execution failed:
error: execution stopped with unexpected state.
error: Execution was interrupted.
The process has been left at the point where it was interrupted,
use "thread return -x" to return to the state before expression evaluation.
This error occurs because you are adding the await keyword in
front of userTask.value and newsTask.value outside of an async
function.
To resolve this error, you need to create an async function that
wraps the section that fetches the data.
Let’s name this function main() as shown below:
func main() async {    let userTask = Task { await fetchUser() }
    let newsTask = Task { await fetchNews() }
    let userResult = await userTask.value    let newsResult = await newsTask.value
    // Process and print results    print("User: \(userResult)")    print("News: \(newsResult)")}
Now that the main() function is an async function, waiting for
the task values won’t cause errors.
The last step is to call the main() function inside a Task block:
Task {    await main()}

--- Page 146 ---
Alright! Now run the program and notice how the text output
appears faster:
Fetching user data...
Fetching the latest news...
News fetched
User fetched
User: Name: Nathan
News: iOS 18 is here!
Because we run the code concurrently inside Task blocks, Swift
immediately starts fetching the latest news before fetching user
data has finished.
To make it clear, here’s an illustration of the concurrency
process:
Notice that Swift runs two separate tasks at the same time in
asynchronous mode, and the main process never goes idle
except when there’s an await command.

--- Page 147 ---
By using concurrency, the total time required to complete the
whole process becomes 3 seconds.
If this is your first time learning asynchronous programming,
concurrency may seem challenging. But don’t worry because
you’ll get used to it with practice.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter10 folder.
Swift provides a robust set of standard libraries designed to
help you write code more efficiently, allowing you to
accomplish more in less time.
One of the most essential libraries is the Foundation library. It
offers useful tools, such as the ability to create Date objects,
introduce delays in function execution with sleep(), and many
more.
If the built-in libraries don’t meet your needs, Swift also allows
you to add external libraries as package dependencies to extend
functionality.
Additionally, you’ve learned about Swift concurrency, which
enables your app to run multiple functions simultaneously. This
helps you maximize time and computing resources for better
performance.
Congratulations on completing Section 1 of the book! We’ve
covered a wide range of Swift concepts and features together in
this section.

--- Page 148 ---
In the next section, we will build on everything we have
learned to develop a robust and extensible iOS application
that’s useful for users.
Take a moment to celebrate your progress. When you are ready,
I’ll see you in the next section.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 149 ---
SECTION 2: DEVELOPING IOS
APPS WITH SWIFT
Welcome to Section 2 of the book. In this section, you will learn
the key skills needed to build a complete iOS app using Swift
and its supporting libraries.
The section covers a wide range of topics that are integral to
modern iOS development:
 
▪
 
Chapter 11: Introduction to SwiftUI
 ▪ Chapter 12: Managing and Storing App Data With SwiftData
 ▪ Chapter 13: Editing and Searching Task Data
 ▪ Chapter 14: Delete, Filter and Sort Task Data
 ▪ Chapter 15: Accessing the Photos Library and Saving Image
 ▪ Chapter 16: Accessing Maps and Adding Locations
 ▪ Chapter 17: Adding Location Detail and Look Around Feature

--- Page 150 ---
 
▪
 
Chapter 18: Adding Application Widget
 
▪
 
Chapter 19: Publishing to App Store
You will learn how to develop an iOS app from scratch and
leverage various Swift frameworks provided by Apple. Each
chapter focuses on building a key aspect of an iOS app,
gradually adding more advanced techniques as you progress.
As the last step, you will also learn how to prepare an app for
release in Apple’s App Store.
By the end of this section, you’ll have a solid understanding of
how to design interfaces, manage data, and integrate essential
app features for iOS using SwiftUI, SwiftData, and more.
Let’s get started!
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 151 ---
CHAPTER 11: INTRODUCTION TO
SWIFTUI - VIEWS AND
MODIFIERS
The first thing we need to do is to understand the code
generated by Xcode when we create the iOS application project
in Chapter 2.
In the TasklyApp file, you should see the code below:
import SwiftUI
@mainstruct TasklyApp: App {
    var body: some Scene {        WindowGroup {            ContentView()        }    }}
First, we import the SwiftUI framework, which is used to
develop the interface of the application.
Next, the @main attribute is used to mark the entry point of the
application. This tells iOS that it should run this file when
launching the application.

--- Page 152 ---
The struct TasklyApp: App creates a struct that adopts the App
protocol.
The only requirement of the App protocol is to implement a
computed property named body that adopts the Scene protocol
(hence the some Scene line)
That’s why you see this code inside the TasklyApp struct:
var body: some Scene {    WindowGroup {        ContentView()    }}
The WindowGroup is a struct that adopts the Scene protocol. It’s
used as a container for all views that your app presents.
In the code above, the WindowGroup simply shows the
ContentView() view.
Next, we’re going to inspect the code written in the ContentView
file:
import SwiftUI
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            Image(systemName: "globe")
                .imageScale(.large)
                .foregroundStyle(.tint)
            Text("Hello, world!")
        }
        .padding()
    }}
#Preview {

--- Page 153 ---
    ContentView()
}
Just like the TasklyApp file, the ContentView file imports the
SwiftUI framework to use SwiftUI features.
Here, the ContentView struct conforms to the View protocol,
which represents part of the user interface shown on the
application. Anything you want to show on the screen is written
inside a View.
The View protocol requires conforming types to create a
computed body property that implements the View protocol,
which is why we have this line:
var body: some View {    // ...}
Next, the Vstack (vertical stack) is a view struct that arranges its
child views vertically from top to bottom. Paddings are added
around the stack using the padding() method.
The Image view displays an image on the screen, and the Text
view draws text on the screen. Notice as well there are two
methods called in sequence on the Image view:
Image(systemName: "globe")    .imageScale(.large)    .foregroundStyle(.tint)
The chained imageScale() and foregroundStyle() methods are
known as modifiers. They are used to customize the appearance
of a view.

--- Page 154 ---
Each modifier changes a particular aspect of the view, and
we’re going to use more of them in later chapters.
Finally, the #Preview section is a SwiftUI directive used to
generate a live preview of your code in the canvas. This is why
you can see the ContentView rendered on Xcode:
If you remove or comment out the preview section, then the
canvas will disappear automatically.
Customizing SwiftUI Views
Now that we have the default structure of the app, the next step
is to start building out the UI for your TasklyApp.
You can replace the ContentView.body content with custom
views and layout elements required in your application.

--- Page 155 ---
For example, let’s create a simple List view that shows an array
items:
struct ContentView: View {
    let tasks = ["Task 1", "Task 2", "Task 3"]
    var body: some View {
        List(tasks, id: \.self) { task in
            Text(task)
        }
    }
}
Here, we create an array named tasks that contain three String
values. Then we added the List() view and passed a closure
that creates a Text(task) element for each value in the array.
You will see a list created in Xcode preview. To see all available
views and modifiers, you can press the Command + Shift + L
shortcut or click the plus button beside the right sidebar
toggler:

--- Page 156 ---
The library window shows all available views and modifiers
you can apply in SwiftUI.
Creating Taskly View Files
To finish this chapter, let’s add all the view files that will be
required for showing, adding, and removing tasks from the
application.
From the Xcode interface, click on the File > New > File from
Template…  or press the Command + N shortcut to create a new
file.

--- Page 157 ---
Select 'SwiftUI View' from the template list and click Next. You
need to create these three SwiftUI views:
 
▪
 
SingleTaskView
 
▪
 
TaskListView
 
▪
 
TaskFormView
These view files will have the same basic Vstack with Image and
Text. We will change them in the following chapters.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter11 folder
in the source code.
In this chapter, we’ve inspected the default files and code
generated by Xcode when starting a new iOS application
project. We’ve also seen how structs and protocols are used
frequently in defining the app’s entry point and its views.
One notable aspect of iOS apps is that they consist of multiple
views, which are displayed or hidden based on user
interactions.

--- Page 158 ---
Before diving deeper into building the app’s interface, let’s first
explore how to manage and store data in an iOS app using
SwiftData.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 159 ---
CHAPTER 12: MANAGING AND
STORING APP DATA WITH
SWIFTDATA
SwiftData is a framework developed by Apple for managing and
storing data in Swift-based applications.
When Apple first introduced Swift, developers still had to rely
on the older Core Data framework, which was originally built
with Objective-C. This made data persistence more complex, as
Swift developers had to interact with Objective-C code to store
data.
SwiftData simplifies this process by adding Swift functions and
methods that handle the interaction with Core Data behind the
scenes.
You can think of SwiftData as a Swift-based bridge that allows
you to use Core Data and create a database within your iOS
application without writing Objective-C code.
In this chapter, you will explore how to integrate SwiftData and
create a data model that can store task data.

--- Page 160 ---
Adding SwiftData to the Project
The first step to use SwiftData is to create the data model.
To organize the code neatly, you can place a SwiftData model in
its own file, so create a new Swift file named TaskItem and write
the following code in it:
import Foundationimport SwiftData
@Modelclass TaskItem {    private(set) var taskID: String = UUID().uuidString    var title: String    var notes: String    var dueDate: Date    var isCompleted: Bool
    init(title: String, notes: String, dueDate: Date, isCompleted: Bool) {        self.title = title        self.notes = notes        self.dueDate = dueDate        self.isCompleted = isCompleted    }}
In the code above, two libraries are imported: The Foundation
library provides essential data types and utilities, such as Date
and UUID (Universally Unique Identifier).
The SwiftData library is imported to use the @Model attribute
which marks a class as a SwiftData model.
A model represents an entity in the data store, and this means
instances of TaskItem can be saved, queried, updated, or deleted
from a database seamlessly.
Next, there are 5 properties added to the TaskItem class:

--- Page 161 ---
 ▪ taskID: This property holds a unique identifier for each task
using a UUID (Universally Unique Identifier) string. The
property is marked as private(set) to make it read-only. This
will be used for creating widgets later.
 ▪ title: A String representing the name of the task.
 ▪ notes: A String for storing additional information or details
about the task.
 ▪ dueDate: A Date object representing the deadline or expected
completion time of the task.
 ▪ isCompleted: A Bool (Boolean) property that indicates whether
the task has been completed or not.
The next step is to create a model container, which allows
SwiftData to read and write data from the iPhone.
Go to the TasklyApp file, import SwiftData, and attach a
modelContainer to the WindowGroup as follows:
import SwiftUI
import SwiftData
@main
struct TasklyApp: App {
    var body: some Scene {
        WindowGroup {
            ContentView()
        }
        .modelContainer(for: TaskItem.self)
    }}
The for argument is used to pass the model you want to use
with the container. Here, we pass the TaskItem class.

--- Page 162 ---
Reading and Displaying SwiftData Entries
To read SwiftData entries, you can import SwiftData and use the
@Query macro to assign the entries into a variable.
A macro is used to generate code at compilation time. It uses the
same @ annotation as attributes.
In the TaskListView file, add the code below:
import SwiftUI
import SwiftData
struct TaskListView: View {
    @Query var tasks: [TaskItem]
    var body: some View {
        NavigationStack {
            List {
                ForEach(tasks) { task in
                    Text(task.title)
                }
            }
            .navigationTitle("Task List")
            .toolbar {
                ToolbarItem {
                    Button {
                    } label: {
                        Image(systemName: "plus")
                    }                }            }        }    }}
First, we import SwiftData and apply the @Query macro to the
tasks variable to fetch all task data.

--- Page 163 ---
Next, we run a ForEach loop inside the List element to show the
data in a Text view. The view is wrapped in a NavigationLink to
let us view the data in a new view.
Finally, the navigationTitle is set as 'Task List', and a toolbar
button is added to enable users to add a new task.
Now you need to display the list in ContentView as follows:
struct ContentView: View {    var body: some View {        TaskListView()    }}
If you run the app now, you will see an empty screen with a title
and a plus button as follows:

--- Page 164 ---
There’s nothing shown because we haven’t added any task data
yet, so let’s do that next.
Creating The TaskFormView and Saving Data
In the TaskFormView file, you need to create a form that can be
used to receive user inputs.
Let’s write the following code to the file:

--- Page 165 ---
import SwiftUI
struct TaskFormView: View {
    @State var title = ""
    @State var notes = ""
    @State var dueDate = Date()
    @State var isCompleted = false
    var body: some View {
        NavigationStack {
            VStack {
                Form {
                    Section {
                        TextField("Title", text: $title)
                            .textFieldStyle(DefaultTextFieldStyle())
                        TextField("Notes...", text: $notes, axis: .vertical)
                            .foregroundStyle(.secondary)
                            .lineLimit(5...10)
                        DatePicker("Due Date", selection: $dueDate)
                            .datePickerStyle(CompactDatePickerStyle())
                    }
                    Section {
                        Toggle("Done", isOn: $isCompleted)
                    }                }            }
        }    }}
The @State variables initialized at the top of the file will be used
to hold user inputs.
These variables are then bound to the Form elements, such as
the TextField view for text input, DatePicker view for date type
input, and Toggle view for the task completion status. Several
modifiers are applied on the TextField and DatePicker views.
The Section view acts as a container that organizes form
elements, making the layout more visually clear and easier to

--- Page 166 ---
read.
Next, you need to add a save button to the view, so add the
following modifiers next to the VStack view:
VStack {
    // ...
}
.navigationTitle("Create Task")
.toolbarTitleDisplayMode(.inline)
.toolbar {
    ToolbarItem(placement: .topBarTrailing) {
        Button("Save Task") {
            if validate {
                addTask()
                dismiss()
            }  else {
                showAlert = true
            }        }    }}
The code above modifies the navigation title and adds a button
to the toolbar for validating and saving tasks.
You will get several errors from Xcode, but that’s okay because
we’re going to handle them next.
First, you need to enable the dismiss() function by retrieving it
from the Environment context:
struct TaskFormView: View {
    @Environment(\.dismiss) var dismiss    // ...}
In SwiftUI, the @Environment attribute enables you to share data
in a global store.

--- Page 167 ---
SwiftUI provides access to various functionalities through the
@Environment attribute, and the dismiss function is one of them.
Next, you need to validate the form before saving it by creating
a validate computed property.
Just below the state properties, add a computed property as
follows:
var validate: Bool {
    guard !title.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).isEmpty
    else {
        return false
    }
    return true
}
Here, we use the guard statement to make sure the title
property is not empty.
We trim the characters to remove whitespaces, and use the NOT
! operator and isEmpty to check for the property value.
When validate is true, we save the data using the addTask()
function, so let’s create it after the validate variable line:
func addTask() {    let newTask = TaskItem(title: title, notes: notes, dueDate: dueDate,
isCompleted: isCompleted)    modelContext.insert(newTask)}
This addTask() function creates a new TaskItem instance and
adds it to SwiftData using the modelContext.insert() method.
You need to import the modelContext from the @Environment as
follows:

--- Page 168 ---
struct TaskFormView: View {    @Environment(\.modelContext) var modelContext    // ...}
The modelContext is an object responsible for managing data.
This context will handle the interaction with the underlying
database.
Finally, we need to show an alert letting the users know that the
task title must be filled.
Create the showAlert state variable first:
@State var showAlert = false
Then add the .alert() modifier to the VStack view as follows:
VStack {    // ...}.alert(isPresented: $showAlert, content: {    Alert(title: Text("Error"), message: Text("Please fill in the title field"))})
The alert will be presented when the isPresented argument is
true, and this argument value is bound to the showAlert state
variable.
The content of the alert will be an Alert view, with a title and
message argument filled as needed.
And now we’re done. You should see the form rendered in
Xcode as follows:

--- Page 169 ---
The next step is to open the TaskFormView from the TaskListView.
Navigating From TaskListView to TaskFormView
In the TaskListView file, add the .navigationDestination
modifier to the List view as follows:
List {    // ...}

--- Page 170 ---
.navigationDestination(isPresented: $showTaskForm) {    TaskFormView()}
The SwiftUI navigationDestination enables you to present a
view on top of another. This view will be presented when the
showTaskForm property is true and you need to call the
TaskFormView() inside the sheet body.
Next, create the showTaskForm state property which defaults to
false, and change it to true when the plus button is tapped:
struct TaskListView: View {
    @Query var tasks: [TaskItem]
    @State var showTaskForm = false // add this state property
    var body: some View {
        NavigationStack {
            List {
                ForEach(tasks) { task in
                    Text(task.title)
                }
            }
            .navigationTitle("Task List")
            .toolbar {
                ToolbarItem {
                    Button {
                        showTaskForm = true // change to true
                    } label: {
                        Image(systemName: "plus")
                    }                }            }
            .navigationDestination(isPresented: $showTaskForm) {
                TaskFormView()
            }        }
    }}
Save all changes, then run the application. You should be able to
tap on the plus button and add a new task item.

--- Page 171 ---
If you tap the 'Add Task' button without adding the title, you
will see an alert as follows:
Tapping the 'Cancel' button will dismiss the form, and the items
you added will be shown on the TaskListView like this:

--- Page 172 ---
The next step is to add the edit task functionality, which you’re
going to do in the next chapter.
A Short SQLite Overview
Under the hood, SwiftData uses SQLite as its underlying
database engine. When the modelContainer() is executed for the
first time, SwiftData automatically creates a local SQLite
database on your device.

--- Page 173 ---
Each @Model defined in your application is mapped to a
corresponding table in the SQLite database, where the model’s
properties are represented as columns.
You don’t need to be familiar with SQLite, but just know that
your data is saved in a table structure as follows:
taskID title notes dueDate isCompleted
d5f3a9c8-112a-4c6b-
bf71-d73bfbef1234
Learning Swift Study Swift
programming
2024-09-30 false
e6b4b0f9-223d-
5d7c-af82-
e84cfcfe4567
Learning iOS
Development
Focus on SwiftUI
and UIKit
2024-10-15 false
With SwiftData, you can manage your data without dealing
with SQL queries or database schema. SwiftData handles all
data interactions for you, making the process intuitive and easy.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter12 folder.
In this chapter, you learned about SwiftData and how to create
a model and model container to begin using it. You also
explored the @Query macro to retrieve data from the database
and display it in a list, as well as how to save new task data
using the modelContext.insert() method.
Additionally, you discovered how to create alerts using the
alert() modifier and how to navigate between views with the
navigationDestination() modifier. This knowledge equips you

--- Page 174 ---
with the skills to effectively manage data and improve user
interactions in your app.
Next, you’re going to improve the interactions further by
allowing users to edit task data.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 175 ---
CHAPTER 13: EDITING AND
SEARCHING TASK DATA
Our application is beginning to take shape as we explore
SwiftUI and SwiftData. In this chapter, we will add more
functionality to enhance the app.
First, we’ll enable users to edit existing task data using the task
form.
Next, we will improve the TaskListView by showing more task
details and a checkmark button, allowing users to easily change
the task status without opening the form.
Finally, we will implement a search functionality to make it
easier for users to find the task they have created previously.
Edit Task in the TaskFormView
To enable editing a task, you need to add a swipe action to each
element in the List view.
In your TaskListView file, add a swipeActions() modifier to the
Text view as follows:

--- Page 176 ---
ForEach(tasks) { task in    Text(task.title)        .swipeActions(edge: .leading) {            Button("Edit") {                showTaskForm = true            }.tint(.green)        }}
The swipeActions() allow you to swipe the list element. The
edge: .leading enables the swipe content at the beginning (left
side) of the element.
If you run the application now, you can swipe the task to the
right to show the button as follows:
Tapping on the button will show the task form. The next step is
to populate the task form when the edit button is tapped.
In the TaskFormView struct, add a new binding property named
taskToEdit as follows:

--- Page 177 ---
struct TaskFormView: View {    @Binding var taskToEdit: TaskItem?    // ...}
This property is an optional TaskItem instance. When the
property is not nil, you need to assign its values to the state
variables.
Add the onAppear() modifier to the VStack as follows:
VStack {
    // ...
}
.onAppear(perform: {
    if let taskToEdit {
        title = taskToEdit.title
        notes = taskToEdit.notes
        dueDate = taskToEdit.dueDate
        isCompleted = taskToEdit.isCompleted
    }
})
You also need to change the navigation title from 'Create Task'
to 'Edit Task' as follows:
.navigationTitle(taskToEdit != nil ? "Edit Task" : "Create Task")
Then, change the text for the save button from 'Save Task' to
'Update Task' like this:
Button(taskToEdit != nil ? "Update Task" : "Save Task")
By the way, you should also get an error from the #Preview
section that says: Missing argument for parameter 'taskToEdit'
in call.

--- Page 178 ---
To fix the error, you only need to add the argument to the
preview as follows:
#Preview {
    @Previewable @State var sampleTask: TaskItem? = TaskItem(title: "Sample
Task", notes: "Sample Notes", dueDate: Date(), isCompleted: false)
    TaskFormView(taskToEdit: $sampleTask)
}
The @Previewable is added in Xcode 16 to allow you to interact
with the state properties in the preview.
Next, let’s populate the taskToEdit property when the user taps
on the 'Edit' button.
Back in the TaskListView file, create a new optional state
property called taskToEdit as follows:
struct TaskListView: View {
    @Query var tasks: [TaskItem]    @State var showTaskForm = false    @State var taskToEdit: TaskItem?
    // ...}
When the user taps the 'Edit' button, assign the task instance to
the property:
Button("Edit") {    showTaskForm = true    taskToEdit = task}.tint(.green)
After that, set the showTaskForm property to nil when the user
taps on the plus button:

--- Page 179 ---
ToolbarItem {
    Button {
        showTaskForm = true
        taskToEdit = nil
    } label: {
        Image(systemName: "plus")
    }}
Finally, pass the binding $taskToEdit when showing the task
form in navigationDestination:
.navigationDestination(isPresented: $showTaskForm) {    TaskFormView(taskToEdit: $taskToEdit)}
And that’s all you need to do. You should be able to see existing
task data when you tap the edit button, and presented with an
empty form when tapping the plus button.
The last step is to update the task data. You can do this easily by
calling the updateTask() button inside the if validate block as
follows:
if validate {    if taskToEdit != nil {        updateTask()    } else {        addTask()    }    dismiss()}  else {    showAlert = true}
When taskToEdit is not nil, the updateTask() function is called.
Otherwise, the addTask() function is executed.
Next, create the updateTask() function in the TaskFormView as
follows:

--- Page 180 ---
func addTask() {    // ...}
func updateTask() {    taskToEdit?.title = title    taskToEdit?.notes = notes    taskToEdit?.dueDate = dueDate
    taskToEdit?.isCompleted = isCompleted}
The updateTask function simply assigns the values of the state
properties back to the taskToEdit object.
Note that the optional chaining ?. is added to conform to Swift
standard. The taskToEdit can’t be nil because we have the
taskToEdit != nil check before calling updateTask() here.
But because you can call updateTask() anywhere in the file,
Swift requires you to either use optional chaining ?. or force
unwrapping !. syntaxes. Either is fine to use in this case.
Run the application now, and you should be able to update task
data without any errors. Well done!
Creating the SingleTaskView
Note that we only show the task title in the list. If users want to
see the task detail, they need to swipe and tap the 'Edit' button.
We can improve this view by showing the task notes, due date,
and status right in the list.
Open the SingleTaskView file you have created earlier and add
the following code:

--- Page 181 ---
struct SingleTaskView: View {
    let task: TaskItem
    var body: some View {
        VStack(alignment: .leading) {
            HStack {
                VStack(alignment: .leading) {
                    Text(task.title)
                        .font(.headline)
                    Text(task.notes)
                        .font(.subheadline)
                    Text(task.dueDate, format: Date.FormatStyle(date:
.abbreviated, time: .shortened))
                        .font(.subheadline)
                }
                Spacer()
                Button {
                    withAnimation(){
                        task.isCompleted.toggle()
                    }
                } label: {
                    Image(systemName: task.isCompleted ?
"checkmark.circle.fill" : "circle")
                        .foregroundColor(Color.blue)
                }            }        }
    }
}
The SingleTaskView accepts a task parameter of type TaskItem
and displays the properties of that parameter.
The HStack is used to create a horizontal stack that contains
three Text elements for the title, notes, and dueDate properties.
The .font() modifier is used to control the font used for these
elements, and there’s an extra format argument for the dueDate
text.

--- Page 182 ---
Next, a button is shown as a blue checkmark. When the user
taps the button, the task status will be changed because of the
task.isCompleted.toggle() code.
The toggle() method turns true to false or false to true.
Adding the task parameter will cause an error in the preview
section, so let’s create a sample task and add it to the preview:
#Preview {    let sampleTask: TaskItem = TaskItem(title: "Sample Task", notes: "SampleNotes", dueDate: Date(), isCompleted: false)    SingleTaskView(task: sampleTask)}
You should see the following output in Xcode preview panel:
Now you need to call the SingleTaskView from TaskListView as
shown below:

--- Page 183 ---
ForEach(tasks) { task in    SingleTaskView(task: task)    // ...}
Note that you only need to change the Text() call to
SingleTaskView() and pass the task argument.
If you run the application now, you should see the improved
task view, and you can toggle the task status by tapping the
checkmark:
But notice that the status is also toggled when you tap
anywhere in the view outside of the button.
To keep the tappable area restricted to the button frame, you
need to add a .buttonStyle(.plain) modifier to it:

--- Page 184 ---
// SingleTaskView
Button {
    withAnimation() {
        task.isCompleted.toggle()
    }
} label: {
    Image(systemName: task.isCompleted ? "checkmark.circle.fill" : "circle")
        .foregroundColor(Color.blue)
}
.buttonStyle(.plain)
Now tapping in the view won’t toggle the task status.
This small improvement has increased the interactivity of the
app greatly, as users don’t need to swipe and tap the 'Edit'
button just to mark the task as completed.
Searching Task Data
Let’s improve the application further by enabling users to
search for a specific task.
SwiftUI includes a searchable() modifier that you can use to
filter data by user input.
In your TaskListView file, add a new state property of String
type as follows:
@State var searchText = ""
Next, add the searchable() modifier to the List view as follows:
List {  // ...}.searchable(text: $searchText, prompt: "Look for a specific task")

--- Page 185 ---
The searchable() modifier will automatically add a text input
for searching.
You can see this already in the preview:
Now you need to use the searchText value for filtering the task
data.
Just above the body property, add a searchResults computed
property as follows:
var searchResults: [TaskItem] {
    if searchText.isEmpty {        return tasks    } else {        return tasks.filter {            $0.title.localizedCaseInsensitiveContains(searchText) ||$0.notes.localizedCaseInsensitiveContains(searchText) }    }}
The searchResults will filter the tasks array when the
searchText is not empty, and it only returns data that contains
the search text either in the title or notes property.

--- Page 186 ---
The last step is to pass the searchResults value in the ForEach
call:
List {    ForEach(searchResults) {        // ...    }}
And the search function is completed. Run the application and
type something into the search bar, and the app will filter the
data accordingly:
The search function will be useful when the user is looking for
a particular task among many task data.
Summary
You can find the project progress for this chapter in the
Chapter13 folder of the source code repository.

--- Page 187 ---
In this chapter, we’ve made significant improvements to the
app by adding the ability to edit and search task data.
We also created the SingleTaskView struct, which demonstrates
how to create a smaller, reusable view that can be integrated
into a larger one, preventing the larger view from becoming too
complex or cluttered.
Additionally, we explored how SwiftData simplifies data
management. Updating saved data is as easy as assigning new
values to object properties. SwiftData takes care of the rest.
In the next chapter, you’ll learn how to add functionalities for
deleting, filtering, and sorting task data.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 188 ---
CHAPTER 14: DELETE, FILTER,
AND SORT TASK DATA
Let’s improve the Taskly application further by adding delete,
filter, and sort functionalities.
These features will be easy since they all have familiar patterns
which you have seen in the previous chapter.
Deleting a Task
To delete a task, you need to create another swipe action in the
TaskListView.
The swipe action will be placed on the trailing edge as shown
below:
ForEach(searchResults) { task in
    SingleTaskView(task: task)
        .swipeActions(edge: .leading) {
          // ...
        }
        .swipeActions(edge: .trailing) {
            Button("Delete") {
                taskToDelete = task
                showDeleteConfirmation = true
            }.tint(.red)

--- Page 189 ---
        }}
The 'Delete' button will have a red color, and when the button is
tapped, the task object will be assigned to the taskToDelete
property.
We will also show a delete confirmation to let the users
consider their actions one last time before deleting the data.
Next, add the two new state properties at the top of the file:
@State var showDeleteConfirmation = false@State var taskToDelete: TaskItem?
Now we need to create the delete confirmation by calling the
alert() modifier on the List view as follows:
.alert(isPresented: $showDeleteConfirmation) {
    Alert(
        title: Text("Are you sure you want to delete this task?"),
        message: Text("This action cannot be undone"),
        primaryButton: .destructive(Text("Delete")) {
            if let task = taskToDelete {
                removeTask(taskToDelete: task)
            }        },
        secondaryButton: .cancel() {
            taskToDelete = nil
        }
    )
}
The alert dialog above will be rendered as follows:

--- Page 190 ---
Now you only need to add the removeTask() function, which
runs the delete process:
struct TaskListView: View {
    @Environment(\.modelContext) var modelContext
    // ...
    var searchResults: [TaskItem] {
      // ...
    }
    func removeTask(taskToDelete: TaskItem) {
        withAnimation {
            modelContext.delete(taskToDelete)
        }
    }}
Here again, we leave the delete process to SwiftData as we call
the modelContext.delete() method.
And that’s it. Run the application now, and you should be able
to swipe left and tap the delete button:

--- Page 191 ---
The confirmation dialog will appear to let you reconsider the
decision one more time. Tap 'Delete' to confirm the decision.
Filtering Task Data
Next, we will add a way to filter task data by adding a tab bar at
the bottom of the screen.
Go to the TaskListView and create an enum of Filter type as
follows:
enum Filter {    case none, completed, notCompleted}

--- Page 192 ---
Next, you need to create the init() function as follows:
init(filter: Filter) {    if filter != .none {        let showCompletedOnly = filter == .completed
        _tasks = Query(filter: #Predicate {            $0.isCompleted == showCompletedOnly        })    }}
The init() function requires the filter parameter of Filter
type.
When the filter value is not none, the query for the tasks
property is modified using the _tasks = Query() call.
In SwiftData, a #Predicate is a logical condition used to filter
and query data. Here, we passed a closure to see if the
isCompleted status is equal to the showCompletedOnly variable.
Now you need to add the filter argument in the preview
section to avoid any error:
#Preview {
    TaskListView(filter: .none)
}
Next, you need to update the ContentView and add the TabView
for the three tabs at the bottom as shown below:
var body: some View {    TabView {        Tab("All Tasks", systemImage: "list.bullet") {            TaskListView(filter: .none)        }        Tab("Completed", systemImage: "checkmark.circle") {            TaskListView(filter: .completed)        }

--- Page 193 ---
        Tab("Not Completed", systemImage: "ellipsis.circle") {            TaskListView(filter: .notCompleted)        }    }}
In the TabView, we create three Tab items, and each receives a
label and an image.
Each Tab view will show the TaskListView in one of three
available filters: all, completed, or not completed.
Run the application again, and you should be able to see the
tabs at the bottom of the screen:
Good work! The only thing left is to sort the task data.

--- Page 194 ---
Sorting Task Data
We’re going to add the ability to sort task data by date, either
ascending or descending.
First, you need to add a state property to the TaskListView as
follows:
@State var isAscending = false
When isAscending is true, the tasks will be sorted from earliest
to latest. Otherwise, it will be sorted latest to earliest.
Next, add a button as a toolbar item that will be used to toggle
the isAscending value:
ToolbarItem(placement: .topBarLeading) {
    Button(action: {        isAscending.toggle()    }) {        HStack {            Image(systemName: "calendar")            Image(systemName: isAscending ? "arrow.down" : "arrow.up")        }    }}
This way, you can change the value of isAscending by tapping
the sort button.
The only thing left is to use the isAscending value inside
searchResults computed property.
Modify the searchResults as follows:
var searchResults: [TaskItem] {    let filtered = tasks.filter { task in        searchText.isEmpty ||        task.title.localizedCaseInsensitiveContains(searchText) ||

--- Page 195 ---
        task.notes.localizedCaseInsensitiveContains(searchText)    }    return filtered.sorted { isAscending ? $0.dueDate < $1.dueDate : $0.dueDate> $1.dueDate }}
The searchResults computed property combines two
operations: filtering and sorting.
First, it filters the tasks based on whether the searchText is
empty or if the task’s title or notes contains the search text
(case-insensitive).
Then, it sorts the filtered tasks by dueDate according to the
selected order (ascending or descending).
The result is an array of tasks that match the search criteria and
are displayed in the desired order.
Run the application again, and you will see a button to sort the
data in the top left corner:

--- Page 196 ---
We have completed all features for this chapter. Wonderful!
Summary
You can find the project progress done in the Chapter14 folder
of the source code repository.
In this chapter, you have learned how to implement the delete,
filter, and sorting logic for the iOS application.

--- Page 197 ---
The core functionalities of the application are now complete.
Let’s see how to access the photos library in the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 198 ---
CHAPTER 15: ACCESSING THE
PHOTOS LIBRARY AND SAVING
IMAGE
With the core functionalities completed, we can turn our
attention to extra features that can make the app more useful to
the users.
There are two extra features we are going to implement in
Taskly:
 
▪
 
Adding images from the photos library
 
▪
 
Adding location from the MapKit
In this chapter, we’re going to learn how to add images from
the photos library first.

--- Page 199 ---
Adding Image Data in TaskItem
The first thing we need to do is to add a property to the TaskItem
class that will hold the image data.
In the TaskItem file, add a taskImge property and update the
init() method as follows:
@Modelclass TaskItem {    // ...
    @Attribute(.externalStorage)    var taskImage: Data?
    init(title: String, notes: String, dueDate: Date, isCompleted: Bool,taskImage: Data?) {        self.title = title        self.notes = notes
        self.dueDate = dueDate        self.isCompleted = isCompleted        self.taskImage = taskImage    }}
Because an image file can be large, the
@Attribute(.externalStorage) syntax is used to store the
taskImage file in external storage.
The Data type is used to store a collection of raw binary data,
such as images, videos, or other media files.
Accessing Device Gallery in TaskFormView
Next, you need to update the TaskFormView to enable the users to
add an image.
Let’s start with importing the PhotosUI library and adding two
new state properties as follows:

--- Page 200 ---
import PhotosUI
struct TaskFormView: View {    // ...    @State var selectedImage: PhotosPickerItem?    @State var taskImage: Data?}
The PhotosUI library provides the functions to select and
manage media files, such as photos and videos. From the
library, you can grab the PhotosPicker() view, which opens the
interface for choosing media from the phone.
Just below the 'Done' toggle button section, create a new section
for the PhotosPicker() as shown below:
Section {    PhotosPicker(selection: $selectedImage, matching: .images) {        Label("Add Image", systemImage: "photo")    }}
The selection argument binds the selected photo to the state
property. The matching argument filters the media shown in the
picker (.images, .videos, .screenshots, .etc)
You can view the photos picker in the canvas:

--- Page 201 ---
To process the image, create a .task() modifier as follows:
.task(id:selectedImage) {    if let data = try? await selectedImage?.loadTransferable(type: Data.self) {        taskImage = data    }
}
The task() modifier is used to run code asynchronously. The
loadTransferable() method processes the image into a Data type,
and the result gets assigned to the taskImage property.
With the image data assigned to taskImage, you can render the
image in the form by using an if block as follows:
Section {
    if let taskImage,
        let img = UIImage(data: taskImage) {
        Image(uiImage: img)
            .resizable()
            .scaledToFill()
            .frame(maxWidth: .infinity, maxHeight: 300)
    }
    PhotosPicker(selection: $selectedImage, matching: .images, photoLibrary:
.shared()) {
        Label("Add Image", systemImage: "photo")

--- Page 202 ---
    }}
When taskImage is not nil, the UIImage class is called to convert
the taskImage into image data that can be rendered in SwiftUI
views.
The Image() struct creates the SwiftUI image view and renders
the given data. You can then set the attributes of the view, such
as resizeable(), scaledToFill(), and so on.
Now when you select an image from the library, it will be
shown on the app as follows:

--- Page 203 ---
Let’s continue by adding a remove image button just above the
PhotosPicker view:
Section {
    if let taskImage,
        let img = UIImage(data: taskImage){
        // ...
    }
    if taskImage != nil {
        Button(role: .destructive) {

--- Page 204 ---
            withAnimation {
                selectedImage = nil
                taskImage = nil
            }
        } label: {
            Label("Remove Image", systemImage:
"xmark.circle").foregroundStyle(.red)
        }
    }
    PhotosPicker(selection: $selectedImage, matching: .images, photoLibrary:
.shared()) {
        Label("Add Image", systemImage: "photo")
    }
}
The 'Remove Image' button will be shown only when the
taskImage property is not nil as follows:

--- Page 205 ---
Now the task form can accept and remove an image selected
from the library.
To add and update the taskImage properly in the model, simply
add the property in the addTask() and updateTask() functions:
func addTask() {    let newTask = TaskItem(title: title, notes: notes, dueDate: dueDate,isCompleted: isCompleted, taskImage: taskImage)

--- Page 206 ---
    modelContext.insert(newTask)}
func updateTask() {    taskToEdit?.title = title    taskToEdit?.notes = notes    taskToEdit?.dueDate = dueDate
    taskToEdit?.isCompleted = isCompleted    taskToEdit?.taskImage = taskImage // update image}
To show the image when the user taps the 'Edit' button, add the
property in the onAppear() modifier:
.onAppear(perform: {
    if let taskToEdit {        title = taskToEdit.title        notes = taskToEdit.notes        dueDate = taskToEdit.dueDate        isCompleted = taskToEdit.isCompleted        taskImage = taskToEdit.taskImage // assign existing image    }})
The image picker is now complete, but you can’t run the
application yet because there are errors in the preview section.
You need to add the taskImage arguments to preview as follows:
#Preview {
    @Previewable @State var sampleTask: TaskItem? = TaskItem(title: "Sample
Task", notes: "Sample Notes", dueDate: Date(), isCompleted: false, taskImage:
nil)
    TaskFormView(taskToEdit: $sampleTask)
}
Alright, now run the application, and you should be able to add,
remove, save, and update the task image.

--- Page 207 ---
Displaying Image in SingleTaskView
Now that we have image data in the model, it’s time to display
this image in the SingleTaskView
All you need to do is to check if the taskImage is not nil, then
render the UIImage view like in the previous section.
Right below the HStack where the task details are shown, add
the code below:
if let taskImage = task.taskImage,    let uiImage = UIImage(data: taskImage) {    Image(uiImage: uiImage)        .resizable()        .scaledToFill()        .frame(maxWidth: .infinity, maxHeight: 120)        .clipShape(RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 10, style: .continuous))}
There are slight differences in the modifier, such as the
maxHeight and clipShape, but it’s still just an Image view. The if
block will render the image only when one exists.
If you run the app again, you can see the image rendered as
follows:

--- Page 208 ---
Next, we’re going to make the image interactive by showing it in
full-screen.
Adding An Image Viewer External Library
In the task list, the user should be able to tap on the image to
show it in full-screen. The user can zoom, and drag the image
around in the full-screen mode.

--- Page 209 ---
Instead of coding this feature from scratch, let’s use an external
library that has been created by other developers in our project.
The library we’re going to use is the SwiftUIImageViewer, which
you can access here:
https://github.com/fuzzzlove/swiftui-image-viewer
To add the library to our project, simply click File > Add
Package Dependencies…  on the Xcode interface, then place the
GitHub link in the search bar. Click Add Package and just
follow the prompts on the screen.
Now that the package is imported into the project, you can
import it in the SingleTaskView file:
import SwiftUIImageViewer
Also, create a state property named isImageFullScreen to control
when the full-screen cover is presented:
@State var isImageFullScreen = false
On the Image view, add the onTapGesture and fullScreenCover()
modifiers as shown below:
if let taskImage = task.taskImage,    let uiImage = UIImage(data: taskImage) {    Image(uiImage: uiImage)        // other modifiers ...        .onTapGesture {
            isImageFullScreen = true        }        .fullScreenCover(isPresented: $isImageFullScreen) {            SwiftUIImageViewer(image: Image(uiImage: uiImage))                .overlay(alignment: .topTrailing) {                    Button {                        isImageFullScreen = false                    } label: {

--- Page 210 ---
                        Image(systemName: "xmark")                            .font(.headline)                    }                    .buttonStyle(.bordered)                    .clipShape(Circle())                    .tint(.red)                    .padding()
                }        }}
The onTapGesture simply changes the value of the
isImageFullScreen state to true, and the fullScreenCover is
where the SwiftUIImageViewer will be shown.
Inside the SwiftUIImageViewer, we add an overlay to display a
button to close the image viewer.
If you run the application now, you should be able to tap on the
image to enable the full-screen mode:


--- Page 211 ---
You can drag the image around and pinch to zoom in. To enable
pinching in the simulator, hold the option button when clicking
anywhere in the image.
However, notice that the full-screen mode is also triggered
when you tap on the check button. This is because SwiftUI
makes the Image view tappable area a bit larger than the visible
frame.
You can reduce the tappable area by adding the .contentShape()
modifier as follows:
.contentShape(Rectangle().inset(by: 10))
.onTapGesture {}
.fullScreenCover {}
The inset(by: 10) parameter reduces the tappable area to the
image frame, now you can tap on the check button again.
Adding Static Task Instance For Previews
The photos picker feature is completed, but there’s something I
want to do just to make the code cleaner.
Remember that when you add taskImage property to the
TaskItem model, the preview section of the application
immediately throws an error.
Rather than adding a sample task in the preview sections
separately, let’s create one static sample task that can be used
anywhere in our application.

--- Page 212 ---
In the TaskItem model, create an extension that contains a static
var instance as shown below:
extension TaskItem {
    static var preview: TaskItem {
        TaskItem(
            title: "Sample Task",
            notes: "Sample Notes",
            dueDate: Date(),
            isCompleted: false,
            taskImage: nil
        )
    }}
Now whenever you need to add a task for preview purposes,
just use the preview object like this:
// TaskFormView#Preview {    @Previewable @State var sampleTask: TaskItem? = TaskItem.preview    TaskFormView(taskToEdit: $sampleTask)}
// SingleTaskView#Preview {    SingleTaskView(task: TaskItem.preview)}
Now whenever you change the TaskItem model, you only need
to change the preview static property to fix the previews.
Summary
The code added in this chapter is available in the Chapter15
folder.
You have learned how to access and process images from the
photos library, and then save them in SwiftData.

--- Page 213 ---
Additionally, you learned how to render images and use an
external library to show the image in interactive full-screen
mode.
When saving data with a large size, you need to use the
@Attribute(.externalStorage) syntax to separate the media
from the total application size.
In the next chapter, we’re going to implement the most
sophisticated feature we have in the app: opening and saving a
custom location from the map view.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 214 ---
CHAPTER 16: ACCESSING MAPS
AND ADDING LOCATIONS
One of the most used features in iOS app development is the
MapKit framework, which is used to interact with maps, places,
and location information.
MapKit allows developers to easily embed interactive maps,
search for interesting places, reverse geocode addresses to
annotations, and respond to user location changes.
With its robust set of features, you can build everything from a
simple map view to sophisticated, data-rich map experiences.
In this chapter, you will learn how to use MapKit and bring
geographical context into the iOS app. Let’s get started!
Creating The MapView
Now we will create a basic map view before adding more
advanced features.
In the project, create a new SwiftUI file named MapView, import
the MapKit library, and call the Map() struct as follows:

--- Page 215 ---
import SwiftUIimport MapKit // Import the MapKit
struct MapView: View {    var body: some View {        Map() // Replace Text with Map    }}
#Preview {    MapView()}
If you run the preview, you can already see a map rendered on
the screen:
Now there’s nothing yet in the map, so let’s start with adding a
marker.
To add a marker, you need to first create a
CLLocationCoordinate2D object, which is a 2D location

--- Page 216 ---
coordinates object that iOS understands.
To create this object, you need to get the latitude and longitude
coordinates of a location. Open the Maps app on your Mac and
search for any location you like to mark on the map.
Once you find the location, click on the three dots …   menu
button, then click Copy Coordinates. For example, below I
grabbed the coordinates of the Empire State Building:
Back to the MapView, create a new CLLocationCoordinate2D
instance using the copied coordinates.
After that, you can create a closure in the Map struct and add a
Marker() there. Pass the title and coordinate of the location to
that marker:
struct MapView: View {
    // Use the coordinates here:
    let empireSB = CLLocationCoordinate2D(latitude: 40.748443, longitude:
-73.985650)

--- Page 217 ---
    var body: some View {
        Map() {
            // Add the Marker
            Marker("Empire State Building", coordinate: empireSB)
        }
    }
}
The marker should now appear in the preview, showing the
location you just added:
The camera region of the map view automatically goes to the
marker. If you have multiple markers, the map will zoom out to
make all the markers visible on the screen.
Connecting MapView to TaskFormView
Let’s connect the MapView with the TaskFormView so we can access
the view from the app. Add a new state property named openMap
as follows:

--- Page 218 ---
@State var openMap = false
Below the Section for adding an image, create another section
for selecting location:
Section("Add Location") {    HStack {        Text("Add a location...")            .foregroundStyle(.gray)            .opacity(0.5)        Spacer()        Button {            openMap.toggle()        } label: {            Image(systemName: "mappin.square.fill")                .font(.title)        }
    }}
The code will create a text view and a button on the right side.
When the button is tapped, the MapView will be shown:
Now I want to show you another way to display a view.
Instead of adding the .navigationDestination() modifier, add a
.sheet() modifier just above the .task() modifier as follows:

--- Page 219 ---
.sheet(isPresented: $openMap) {    MapView()}.task(id:selectedImage) {}
The sheet modifier will show the view in a modal-style
presentation, in which you can see the previous view as a stack
at the top of the screen. The view will also slide from the bottom
instead of from the side.
Now when you click on the map icon button, the MapView will be
opened.
Showing User Location
To show the user location on the map, you will need to ask for
permission to access user location.
First, open the Taskly.xcodeproject file and open the Info tab.
Here, you need to add a custom iOS target property called
Privacy - Location when in use usage description, then insert
the value as 'Search nearby locations':


--- Page 220 ---
Back to the map view, you need to create a CLLocationManager()
instance, which can be used to ask for location access.
You also need to create a MapCameraPosition instance that’s
directed at the userLocation as shown below:
struct MapView: View {
    let manager = CLLocationManager()
    @State var cameraPosition = MapCameraPosition.userLocation(fallback:
.automatic)
    let empireSB = CLLocationCoordinate2D(latitude: 40.748443, longitude:
-73.985650)
    var body: some View {
        Map(position: $cameraPosition) {
            UserAnnotation()
            Marker("Empire State Building", coordinate: empireSB)
        }
        .onAppear {
            manager.requestWhenInUseAuthorization()
        }    }}
The cameraPosition is bound to the position argument in the
Map() struct. The UserAnnotation() struct marks the user
location on the map.
When the view appears, the
manager.requestWhenInUseAuthorization() will be called.
Now run the application, and you will be asked for location
access permission when opening the MapView. You can select
either Allow Once or Allow While Using App.
If you select Don’t Allow, then you need to enable location
access from the settings, or just uninstall the app and run it
from Xcode again.

--- Page 221 ---
In the simulator, you might notice that the camera doesn’t show
your current location.
This is because the simulator location is controlled from the
settings instead of using your actual location. To change the
simulator location, select Features > Location from the top
menu:

--- Page 222 ---
You can use a custom location, or you can just select Apple as
shown above.
And that’s how you request the user location and annotate that
location on the map. In the next section, you will see how to
enable location search functionality.
Enabling Dismiss and Map Search
To enable dismiss and map search, you need to add three more
properties to the MapView:
 ▪ The dismiss function from the environment
 
▪
 
A searchText for storing the string input

--- Page 223 ---
 
▪
 
A searchResults array of MKMapItem array
struct MapView: View {
    @Environment(\.dismiss) var dismiss    @State var searchText = ""    @State var searchResults = [MKMapItem]()    // ...}
MKMapItem is a MapKit map item object which contains details of
locations.
Next, call the overlay() modifier just below the onAppear()
modifier. In this overlay, add a small circle button to dismiss the
view and the search bar:
.onAppear {}
.overlay(alignment: .top) {
    VStack(alignment: .trailing) {
        Button(action: {
            dismiss()
        }) {
            Image(systemName: "xmark.circle.fill")
                .resizable()
                .padding(4)
                .frame(width: 30, height: 30)
                .foregroundStyle(.gray, Color(.systemBackground))
        }
        TextField("Search Location...", text: $searchText)
            .font(.subheadline)
            .padding(12)
            .background(Color(.systemBackground))
            .padding()
            .shadow(color: .gray.opacity(0.5), radius: 10)
    }
}
Both Button and Text views have a group of modifiers added to
make it pleasing.

--- Page 224 ---
Now you need to add an onSubmit() modifier for when the user
presses Enter after typing the search text:
.onAppear {}.overlay(alignment: .top) {}.onSubmit(of: .text){    Task { await searchLocation() }}
The searchLocation() is an asynchronous function that will run
the search using MapKit.
Let’s write the function in an extension just to keep the code
organized:
extension MapView {    func searchLocation() async {        let searchRequest = MKLocalSearch.Request()        searchRequest.naturalLanguageQuery = searchText
        let response = try? await MKLocalSearch(request: searchRequest).start()        self.searchResults = response?.mapItems ?? []    }}
The MKLocalSearch.Request() creates a MapKit request object for
performing local search. The search parameter
naturalLanguageQuery is set to the searchText value.
The request is executed asynchronously using the
MKLocalSearch.start() method, and the response is assigned to
the self.searchResults property.
You will get an error when calling MKLocalSearch.start() as
follows:
Non-sendable type 'MKLocalSearch.Response' returned by implicitly asynchronous
call to nonisolated function cannot cross actor boundary

--- Page 225 ---
This error occurs because Swift 6 has strict concurrency
checking, which conflicts with the MapKit library.
To fix this error, you need to add the @preconcurrency attribute
when importing MapKit as follows:
@preconcurrency import MapKit
That should silence the error. You can remove the default
marker we placed in the Map() previously, and create multiple
markers using a ForEach loop:
Map(position: $cameraPosition) {
    UserAnnotation()
    ForEach(searchResults, id: \.self) { item in
        let placemark = item.placemark
        Marker(placemark.name ?? "", coordinate: placemark.coordinate)
    }
}
Try to run the application now, open the map view, type some
text, then hit Enter.
For example, here I search for nearby Starbucks locations:

--- Page 226 ---
You can search for any nearby places on your map, such as 'Gas
station' or 'Restaurant'.
If you try to click on the search markers, you will notice that
nothing happens.
To make the markers interactive, let’s add a selectedLocation
property of optional type MKMapItem? and pass it to the Map()

--- Page 227 ---
view:
@State var selectedLocation: MKMapItem?// ...Map(position: $cameraPosition, selection: $selectedLocation) {}
The selection parameter in the Map() struct automatically
enables tapping on search markers. The data of the tapped
marker will be stored in selectedLocation.
Now when you click on a search marker, there’s a short
animation and the marker will grow larger than the rest:

--- Page 228 ---
To know when the user taps on a marker, you can add the
onChange() modifier to the Map as follows:
.onSubmit(of: .text) {}
.onChange(of: selectedLocation, { oldValue, newValue in
    print("Marker Selected")
})

--- Page 229 ---
Each time a marker is tapped, the onChange() modifier will print
the text above.
Now all main functionalities of the MapView are implemented.
Let’s take a short break before continue developing the map
interaction.
Summary
The code added in this chapter can be found in Chapter16
folder in the provided source code.
In this chapter, you learned how to utilize the MapKit
framework to create a map view, ask permission for user
location, and search for interesting locations on the map.
Additionally, you learned about the .sheet() modifier, which is
used to show a view in a modal-style.
As you can see, the MapKit framework makes adding and
interacting with geographic context easy. You can generate a
map of the whole earth just by calling the Map() view.
Next, you will learn how to show location details and take the
user to a location virtual tour using MapKit’s LookAroundPreview
struct.

--- Page 230 ---
Chapter 17: Adding Location Detail and Look
Around Feature
With the MapKit search feature and location markers
implemented, you can now move forward and add more
sophisticated interaction to the map view.
The MapKit framework provides you with the LookAroundPreview,
which can be used to create preview imagery for a specific
geographic location on the map.
You can tap on the preview to experience a 360-degree
panoramic view of the location:
In this chapter, you’re going to learn how to present location
details, implement the LookAroundPreview as shown above, open

--- Page 231 ---
location in the Apple Maps app, and save location data into
SwiftData.
Adding Child View For Location Detail
When the user taps on a marker, we need to show another view
revealing the location details, adding a look around scene, and
two action buttons.
First, add one more property to the MapView as follows:
@State var showLocationDetail = false
The showLocationDetail property is used to control the sheet()
modifier to display a child view.
Next, update the onChange() modifier in the MapView like this:
.onChange(of: selectedLocation, { oldValue, newValue in    showLocationDetail = newValue != nil})
This way, the showLocationDetail value will be true as long as
the newValue for selectedLocation is not nil.
Just below onChange() add the sheet() modifier as follows:
.onChange() {}.sheet(isPresented: $showLocationDetail) {    LocationDetailView()        .presentationDetents([.height(360)])        .presentationBackgroundInteraction(.enabled(upThrough: .height(360)))        .presentationCornerRadius(10)
}

--- Page 232 ---
When calling the LocationDetailView() above, there are three
modifiers added to the view to make the interaction more
dynamic.
The presentationDetents adjust the view height, and
presentationBackgroundInteraction enables interacting with the
parent view — in this case, the MapView — while keeping the
child view open.
Now create a new SwiftUI file named LocationDetailView and
run the application to test it.
If you tap on a location after search, you can see the detail view
displayed only around half of the screen:

--- Page 233 ---
Very nice! The next step is to populate the LocationDetailView.
Populating LocationDetailView
Import the MapKit framework to the view, add two properties to
the view, and then set the body view as follows:

--- Page 234 ---
import SwiftUI
@preconcurrency import MapKit
struct LocationDetailView: View {
    @Environment(\.dismiss) var dismiss
    @Binding var selectedLocation: MKMapItem?
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            HStack {
                VStack(alignment: .leading) {
                    Text(selectedLocation?.placemark.name ?? "")
                        .font(.title2)
                        .fontWeight(.semibold)
                    Text(selectedLocation?.placemark.title ?? "")
                        .font(.footnote)
                        .foregroundStyle(.gray)
                        .lineLimit(2)
                        .padding(.trailing)
                }
                Spacer()
                Button {
                    dismiss()
                    selectedLocation = nil
                } label: {
                    Image(systemName: "xmark.circle.fill")
                        .resizable()
                        .frame(width: 24, height: 24)
                        .foregroundStyle(.gray, Color(.systemBackground))
                }
            }        }    }}
// Update preview:
#Preview {
    LocationDetailView(selectedLocation: .constant(nil))
}
The selectedLocation binding will receive the location tapped
by the user in MapView, while the dismiss() function is used to
close the view.

--- Page 235 ---
The interface defined in the body creates two text views and a
button as follows:
Next, you need to fetch the look around scene from MapKit. Add
a lookAround property to the view:
@State var lookAround: MKLookAroundScene?

--- Page 236 ---
Then create a function that will get the look around scene
content.
Let’s add this function in an extension:
extension LocationDetailView {    func fetchLookAroundPreview() {        if let selectedLocation {            lookAround = nil            Task {                let request = MKLookAroundSceneRequest(mapItem:selectedLocation)                lookAround = try? await request.scene            }        }
    }}
In this fetchLookAroundPreview() function, you just create a
request to MKLookAroundSceneRequest() to get the
MKLookAroundScene instance.
The lookAround property can then be used to create a
lookAroundPreview() in the view body.
Put the following code under the HStack view:
var body: some View {
    VStack {
        HStack {
            // ...
        }
        if let scene = lookAround {
            LookAroundPreview(initialScene: scene)
                .frame(height: 200)
                .presentationCornerRadius(10)
                .padding()
        } else {
            ContentUnavailableView("No preview available", systemImage:
"eye.slash")
        }    }

--- Page 237 ---
    .onAppear {
        fetchLookAroundPreview()
    }
    .onChange(of: selectedLocation) { oldValue, newValue in
        fetchLookAroundPreview()
    }
    .padding()
}
Now the look around scene is complete. You can run the app to
see the results as follows:
The last step is to add two buttons: one for opening the location
in the Maps app, and the other to save the location in our
TaskItem model.
Let’s continue with adding two buttons in a HStack just below
the else block for ContentUnavailableView like this:
else {
    ContentUnavailableView("No preview available", systemImage: "eye.slash")

--- Page 238 ---
}
HStack(spacing: 24) {
    Button {
        // save location
        dismiss()
    } label: {
        Text("Save Location")
            .font(.headline)
            .foregroundStyle(.white)
            .frame(width: 170, height: 48)
            .background(.green)
            .presentationCornerRadius(10)
    }
    Button {
        if let selectedLocation {
            selectedLocation.openInMaps()
        }
    } label: {
        Text("Open in Maps")
            .font(.headline)
            .foregroundStyle(.white)
            .frame(width: 170, height: 48)
            .background(.blue)
            .presentationCornerRadius(10)
    }}
The left button will save the location to the task, while the
button on the right will open the location in the Maps app.
Opening a location in Maps is as simple as calling the
selectedLocation.openInMaps().
Saving Location Data
Now that the LocationDetailView is set, the only thing left is to
save the location in the TaskItem model.
Open the TaskItem file and add three properties that will store
the location selected by the user:

--- Page 239 ---
@Modelclass TaskItem {    // other properties ...
    // save location    var location: String = ""    var latitude: Double?    var longitude: Double?
}
The location property will save the location name, while
latitude and longitude stores the position of the location.
You need to add the properties to the init() and static var as
well:
init(title: String, notes: String, dueDate: Date, isCompleted: Bool,
taskImage: Data?, location: String, latitude: Double?, longitude: Double?) {
    self.title = title
    self.notes = notes
    self.dueDate = dueDate
    self.isCompleted = isCompleted
    self.taskImage = taskImage
    self.location = location
    self.latitude = latitude
    self.longitude = longitude
}
// In extension:
static var preview: TaskItem {
    TaskItem(
        title: "Sample Task",
        notes: "Sample Notes",
        dueDate: Date(),
        isCompleted: false,
        taskImage: nil,
        location: "",
        latitude: nil,
        longitude: nil
    )
}
With this, the SwiftData model is ready to accept location data.

--- Page 240 ---
Next, go to the TaskFormView and create three state properties
for storing location data:
@State var taskLocation: String = ""@State var taskLat: Double? = nil@State var taskLong: Double? = nil
Then add these properties to addTask(), updateTask(), and
onAppear() as follows:
func addTask() {
    let newTask = TaskItem(title: title, notes: notes, dueDate: dueDate,
isCompleted: isCompleted, taskImage: taskImage, location: taskLocation,
latitude: taskLat, longitude: taskLong)
    modelContext.insert(newTask)
}
func updateTask() {
    taskToEdit?.title = title
    taskToEdit?.notes = notes
    taskToEdit?.dueDate = dueDate
    taskToEdit?.isCompleted = isCompleted
    taskToEdit?.taskImage = taskImage
    taskToEdit?.location = taskLocation
    taskToEdit?.latitude = taskLat
    taskToEdit?.longitude = taskLong
}
.onAppear(perform: {
    if let taskToEdit {
        title = taskToEdit.title
        detail = taskToEdit.detail
        dueDate = taskToEdit.dueDate
        isCompleted = taskToEdit.isCompleted
        taskLocation = taskToEdit.location
        taskLat = taskToEdit.latitude
        taskLong = taskToEdit.longitude
        selectedImage = taskToEdit.taskImage
    }})
Also, change the add location Text() view to show the selected
location name as follows:

--- Page 241 ---
Text(taskLocation.isEmpty ? "Add a location..." : taskLocation)
Now you need to pass these state properties to the MapView, so
open the view and add the following properties to store location
data:
// MapView
@Binding var loc: String
@Binding var lat: Double?
@Binding var long: Double?
// update preview:
#Preview {
    MapView(loc: .constant(""), lat: .constant(0), long: .constant(0))
}
Back in TaskFormView, pass the properties when calling the
MapView():
.sheet(isPresented: $openMap) {
    MapView(loc: $taskLocation, lat: $taskLat, long: $taskLong)}
The next step is to change the initial marker placed on the map.
When the location coordinates (lat, and long) exist, you need to
move the marker to that location. Otherwise, show the user
location.
First, change the cameraPosition property to .automatic:
@State var cameraPosition = MapCameraPosition.automatic
Then create a computed property called initialCoord and a
function named updateCameraPosition() as follows:
var initialCoord: CLLocationCoordinate2D {    return CLLocationCoordinate2D(latitude: lat ?? 0, longitude: long ?? 0)

--- Page 242 ---
}
func updateCameraPosition() {    let markRegion = MKCoordinateRegion(center: initialCoord, span:MKCoordinateSpan(latitudeDelta: 0.04, longitudeDelta: 0.04))    cameraPosition = MapCameraPosition.region(markRegion)}
The initialCoord property creates a CLLocationCoordinate2D
instance from the passed lat and long values.
The updateCameraPosition() will then create a MapCameraPosition
instance that uses the coordinate as its center.
The MKCoordinateRegion is used to select a region of the map we
want to use, with the center argument as the center of the map,
and span defines the extent of the map’s view from the center.
You need to call the function inside onAppear() modifier as
follows:
.onAppear {    manager.requestWhenInUseAuthorization()    if (lat != nil && long != nil) {        updateCameraPosition()
    } else {        cameraPosition = MapCameraPosition.userLocation(fallback: .automatic)    }}
After that, you need to replace the UserAnnotation() used inside
the Map() view to a custom annotation that uses the loc and
initialCoord data as follows:
Annotation(loc, coordinate: initialCoord) {
    ZStack {
        Circle()
            .frame(width: 32, height: 32)
            .foregroundStyle(.blue.opacity(0.25))
        Circle()

--- Page 243 ---
            .frame(width: 20, height: 20)
            .foregroundStyle(.white)
        Circle()
            .frame(width: 12, height: 12)
            .foregroundStyle(.blue)
    }}
The above code will create an annotation on the map similar to
the UserAnnotation struct, but the coordinate of this custom
annotation can be changed.
Alright. Now pass the location data to LocationDetailView:
LocationDetailView(selectedLocation: $selectedLocation, loc: $loc, lat: $lat,long: $long)
Create binding properties in the LocationDetailView and assign
the location data to these properties when the save button is
tapped:
// LocationDetailView properties:
@Binding var loc: String
@Binding var lat: Double?
@Binding var long: Double?
// Save button:
Button {
    loc = selectedLocation?.name ?? ""
    lat = selectedLocation?.placemark.location?.coordinate.latitude
    long = selectedLocation?.placemark.location?.coordinate.longitude
    dismiss()
} label: {
    Text("Save Location")
        .font(.headline)
        .foregroundStyle(.white)
        .frame(width: 170, height: 48)
        .background(.green)
        .presentationCornerRadius(10)
}
// Update preview:
#Preview {

--- Page 244 ---
    LocationDetailView(selectedLocation: .constant(nil), loc: .constant(""),
lat: .constant(0), long: .constant(0))
}
With that, the location can now be saved in the TaskItem model.
Automatically Close MapView When Saving
Location
If you test the application now, you will notice that the map
view is not closed immediately after the user taps on the Save
Location button.
You can use a state property to track when the user taps on the
Save Location button, and then close the MapView as a response.
In the MapView file, add a new state property as follows:
@State var isLocationSaved = false
Next, update the .sheet() modifier to include an onDismiss
argument, and pass isLocationSaved to LocationDetailView as
follows:
.sheet(isPresented: $showLocationDetail, onDismiss: {    if isLocationSaved {        dismiss()    }}) {    LocationDetailView(selectedLocation: $selectedLocation, loc: $loc, lat:$lat, long: $long, isLocationSaved: $isLocationSaved)        .presentationDetents([.height(360)])        .presentationBackgroundInteraction(.enabled(upThrough: .height(360)))        .presentationCornerRadius(10)
}

--- Page 245 ---
When isLocationSaved is true, the MapView will close
automatically.
Finally, update the LocationDetailView as shown below:
// Add a binding property
@Binding var isLocationSaved: Bool
// Modify save button:
Button {
    loc = selectedLocation?.name ?? ""
    lat = selectedLocation?.placemark.location?.coordinate.latitude
    long = selectedLocation?.placemark.location?.coordinate.longitude
    isLocationSaved = true // change isLocationSaved to true
    dismiss()
}
// Update preview:
#Preview {
    LocationDetailView(selectedLocation: .constant(nil), loc: .constant(""),
lat: .constant(0), long: .constant(0), isLocationSaved: .constant(true))
}
With this, the MapView will be dismissed when you save a
location to the task.
Showing Location in SingleTaskView
We’ve gone through great lengths to enable users to save and
update location data, but we haven’t shown it yet in our main
view.
Add the following code in SingleTaskView to show the saved
location:
if let taskImage = task.taskImage,    let uiImage = UIImage(data: taskImage) {    // ...}if !task.location.isEmpty {    HStack {

--- Page 246 ---
        Image(systemName: "mappin.and.ellipse")        Text((task.location))    }    .font(.subheadline)    .foregroundStyle(.blue)    .onTapGesture {        openLocationInMaps()
    }}
When the user taps on the location text, we will open the
location in Maps.
This means we need to import MapKit and write the
openLocationInMaps() function:
import MapKit
// ...
extension SingleTaskView {    func openLocationInMaps() {        let coordinate = CLLocationCoordinate2D(latitude: task.latitude!,longitude: task.longitude!)        let placemark = MKPlacemark(coordinate: coordinate)        let mapItem = MKMapItem(placemark: placemark)        mapItem.name = task.location        mapItem.openInMaps()    }}
And that’s it. Now the location data is displayed on the task list:

--- Page 247 ---
When you tap on the blue location text, you will be directed to
the Maps app.
Summary
The code for this chapter is available in the Chapter17 folder of
the source code.

--- Page 248 ---
In this chapter, you learned how to create quite a complex
interaction using the MapKit framework. Well done!
If you take a moment to look at the code written for the MapView
and LocationDetailView, you will notice much of the code has
been written before.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to create application
widgets.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 249 ---
CHAPTER 18: ADDING
APPLICATION WIDGET
A widget is a compact, standalone interface that displays key
information from an app directly on the home screen or other
convenient areas, such as the Mac desktop or iPad lock screen.
Designed to provide an overview, widgets show important data
like the current weather, calendar events, or task lists.
This makes it easier for users to interact with the application
data without opening the app, increasing convenience by
keeping important information and actions easily accessible.
In this chapter, you will learn how to create a widget that shows
tasks, and allow users to mark tasks as completed.
Adding Widget Target
To add widgets to an app, you need to create a widget extension
for that application.
In Xcode, select File > New > Target…  to create a new target:

--- Page 250 ---
In the template selection menu, select Widget Extension and
click Next. You can use the search bar to find the option easier:
Now you need to input the widget details. You can name it
'TasklyWidget', add the extension to the same team as Taskly
app, then uncheck the 'Include … ' options as shown below:

--- Page 251 ---
Click Finish and Xcode will ask whether you want to activate
the widget extension scheme:

--- Page 252 ---
Click Activate and Xcode will start generating a starter
template for this widget extension.
After a while, you should see a new folder named
'TasklyWidget' and 'Frameworks' in the navigator sidebar, and
there’s a new target in the top bar:

--- Page 253 ---
This means the widget extension is successfully generated. You
can run the application to see the widget appear in the
simulator as follows:

--- Page 254 ---
You have added the widget extension to the app successfully.
Next, you will learn how to modify this default widget into
something relevant to the app.

--- Page 255 ---
Sharing App Data With Widgets
Let’s explore the files generated by Xcode to understand how
the widget works.
If you open the TasklyWidgetBundle file, you will see the code
below:
import WidgetKitimport SwiftUI
@mainstruct TasklyWidgetBundle: WidgetBundle {    var body: some Widget {        TasklyWidget()    }}
This file functions similarly to the TasklyApp file, acting as the
main entry point for the widget extension. The WidgetKit is the
Swift widget management framework.
Instead of adopting the App protocol (which is used in the main
app and defines the app’s Scene), a widget bundle adopts the
WidgetBundle protocol.
The body of a widget bundle can contain one or more structs
that implement the Widget protocol.
Next, open the TasklyWidget file to see the content of the widget
template.
The first thing you need to know is the TasklyWidget struct:
struct TasklyWidget: Widget {    let kind: String = "TasklyWidget"
    var body: some WidgetConfiguration {

--- Page 256 ---
        StaticConfiguration(kind: kind, provider: Provider()) { entry in            if #available(iOS 17.0, *) {                TasklyWidgetEntryView(entry: entry)                    .containerBackground(.fill.tertiary, for: .widget)            } else {                TasklyWidgetEntryView(entry: entry)                    .padding()
                    .background()            }        }        .configurationDisplayName("My Widget")        .description("This is an example widget.")    }}
This struct contains the configuration on how to set up the
widget. You can see there’s the StaticConfiguration() struct
being called at the body there.
The kind property is a string that identifies the widget. The
provider is an object that generates the widget content from
your data. It also determines when to update your widget
content.
Each entry obtained from the provider will then be passed to
the TasklyWidgetEntryView, which is the main display layout
used by the widget.
Notice there’s an if/else statement in the closure body:
if #available(iOS 17.0, *) {    TasklyWidgetEntryView(entry: entry)        .containerBackground(.fill.tertiary, for: .widget)} else {    TasklyWidgetEntryView(entry: entry)        .padding()        .background()}
This is because in iOS 17 or higher, the widget background is
programmed to follow the tertiary color set by the device

--- Page 257 ---
theme. In earlier iOS versions, the background is simply set to
transparent with .background() modifier.
You can test this in the canvas by enabling the dark appearance
mode as follows:


--- Page 258 ---
The containerBackground() modifier is only available from iOS
17, so devices with earlier iOS versions will crash when the
widget is added.
Leave the closure as it is for now, and let’s move on to the two
modifiers placed after the closure:
.configurationDisplayName("My Widget").description("This is an example widget.")
These modifiers control the display name and description
shown when you select widgets on the phone.
Go to the simulator, then long-tap in the phone background to
activate jiggle mode, where the apps are all shaking.
Tap Edit in the top-left corner of the screen, then tap Add
Widget. Search for the 'Taskly' widget and tap it to see the
display name and description:


--- Page 259 ---
Let’s change these two informational entries and make them
relevant as follows:
.configurationDisplayName("Taskly Widget").description("View active tasks and complete them in a snap.")
Next, let’s explore the TasklyWidgetEntryView, which is used to
define the layout of the widget:
struct TasklyWidgetEntryView : View {
    var entry: Provider.Entry
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            Text("Time:")
            Text(entry.date, style: .time)
            Text("Emoji:")
            Text(entry.emoji)
        }    }}
This part should be very familiar to you, as it’s the same code
used by views created in previous chapters.
There are four Text views in this struct, displaying the date and
emoji from the entry object, which is a Provider.Entry type.
Now we get to explore the Provider struct. As the name implies,
this struct provides the data that wants to be shown on the
widget:
struct Provider: TimelineProvider {    func placeholder(in context: Context) -> SimpleEntry {        SimpleEntry(date: Date(), emoji: " 😀 ")    }
    // ...}

--- Page 260 ---
There are 3 functions the TimelineProvider requires. First, the
placeholder function shows a generic visual representation of
your widget before the snapshot data is retrieved.
Second, the getSnapshot() function is used in the widget gallery,
when you select the widget to add to the home screen:
func getSnapshot(in context: Context, completion: @escaping (SimpleEntry) ->
()) {
    let entry = SimpleEntry(date: Date(), emoji: " 😀 ")
    completion(entry)
}
The completion() function is used to pass the entry to WidgetKit,
which displays the entry.
Finally, the getTimeline() function is where the real entries are
generated:
func getTimeline(in context: Context, completion: @escaping (Timeline<Entry>) -> ()) {
    var entries: [SimpleEntry] = []
    // Generate a timeline consisting of five entries an hour apart    // starting from the current date.    let currentDate = Date()    for hourOffset in 0 ..< 5 {        let entryDate = Calendar.current.date(byAdding: .hour, value:hourOffset, to: currentDate)!        let entry = SimpleEntry(date: entryDate, emoji: " 😀 ")        entries.append(entry)    }
    let timeline = Timeline(entries: entries, policy: .atEnd)
    completion(timeline)}
The function generates five entries, each will be shown an hour
apart from the current date.

--- Page 261 ---
If you want to see the entries change faster, change the byAdding
argument to .minute to see a new one generated after a minute:
let entryDate = Calendar.current.date(byAdding: .minute, value: hourOffset, to:currentDate)!
Now you will see the 'Time' part of the widget changes after one
minute.
In Xcode 16, there’s also the relevances() function that’s
commented out in the Provider structure like this:
func relevances() async -> WidgetRelevances<Void> {    // Generate a list containing the contexts this widget is relevant in.}
The relevances() function controls the importance of the widget
in the widget smart stacks or widget suggestions feature.
This function is an optional addition, so let’s remove it to focus
on creating a proper widget first.
The last structure in the TasklyWidget file is the SimpleEntry
struct, which simply describes the data used in the timeline:
struct SimpleEntry: TimelineEntry {    let date: Date
    let emoji: String}
Now that we have explored the generated code, let’s begin to
modify the widget to suit our needs.

--- Page 262 ---
Sharing SwiftData to the Widget
To share SwiftData with the widget extension, you need to put
the main app and the widget in the same app group.
On the navigator sidebar, select the 'Taskly' main project option,
then navigate to 'Signing & Capabilities' tab and add a new 'App
Groups' Capability:
Next, you need to create a new group for the project. You can
name it 'groups.com.yourname.taskly' as shown below:

--- Page 263 ---
You also need to do the same with the 'TasklyWidgetExtension'
target. Make sure that you add the target to the same group:


--- Page 264 ---
With the app and the widget extension placed in the same
group, they can share available resources such as the database
container.
Now you need to share the TaskItem model between the main
app and the widget.
Open the TaskItem file, then go to the inspector sidebar on the
right side and add TasklyWidgetExtension as a target for the
TaskItem:
Now you can use the TaskItem model in the widget. Go to
TasklyWidget, and write import SwiftData at the top of the file:
import SwiftData

--- Page 265 ---
The next thing you need to do is to change the SimpleEntry
struct.
Replace the emoji property with tasks of [TaskItem] type as
shown below:
struct SimpleEntry: TimelineEntry {
    let date: Date
    let tasks: [TaskItem]
}
Now you will get errors in many places. Just replace the emoji
argument with an empty tasks array as follows:
SimpleEntry(date: .now, tasks: [])
Next, you need to create a model context inside the
getTimeline() function to fetch the incomplete tasks.
Remove replace the code in the getTimeline() function with the
following code:
func getTimeline(in context: Context, completion: @escaping (Timeline<Entry>) -> ()) {
    let context = try? ModelContext(.init(for: TaskItem.self))    let descriptor = FetchDescriptor(
        predicate: #Predicate<TaskItem>{ $0.isCompleted == false },        sortBy: [SortDescriptor(\TaskItem.dueDate)]    )
    let tasks = try? context?.fetch(descriptor)
    let entry = SimpleEntry(date: .now, tasks: tasks ?? [])    let timeline = Timeline(entries: [entry], policy: .atEnd)    completion(timeline)}
The code above simply creates a context and a descriptor that
you can use to get the tasks array. You can’t use the @Query

--- Page 266 ---
macro here because it’s outside of SwiftUI view.
The tasks array is added to the entry object, which then gets
pushed to the Timeline object.
Now you can loop over the entry.tasks array in the
TasklyWidgetEntryView struct as follows:
struct TasklyWidgetEntryView : View {
    var entry: Provider.Entry
    var body: some View {
        VStack {
            ForEach(entry.tasks) { task in
                HStack(spacing: 10) {
                    Text(task.title).font(.headline)
                    Text(task.dueDate, format: Date.FormatStyle(date:
.numeric, time: .shortened)).font(.subheadline)
                    Spacer()
                    Button {
                    } label: {
                        Image(systemName: "circle")
                    }
                    .font(.callout)
                    .buttonBorderShape(.circle)
                }
                .transition(.push(from: .bottom))
            }        }
        .frame(maxWidth: .infinity, maxHeight: .infinity, alignment: .top)
        .overlay {
            if entry.tasks.isEmpty {
                Text("Nothing to do!  ")
                    .font(.callout)
                    .transition(.push(from: .bottom))
            }
        }
    }}
Here, the ForEach() function is called to iterate over the tasks
object values and render each one in the widget.

--- Page 267 ---
There’s also a Button view added in the loop that we will use to
mark a task as completed.
When the tasks array is empty, a 'Nothing to do!' view will be
shown. You can run the application now to see the task data
shown on the widget.
The next step is to make the widget interactive by enabling the
circle button.
Making The Widget Interactive
To add interactivity to the widget, you need to use the
AppIntents framework, which was introduced in iOS 16.
The AppIntents framework allows you to integrate your app’s
functionality with various iOS platform services, such as Siri,
Spotlight Search, and Widgets. It enables external services to
send an intent (a request to perform a specific action) back to
your app.
An intent is a set of code instructions that is executed in
response to a user interaction or system event.
In this case, by using an intent, the widget can send a command
to update the task status when the button is tapped.
Start by importing the AppIntents framework in the
TasklyWidget file:
import AppIntents

--- Page 268 ---
Next, define a new struct named ToggleButton at the bottom of
your file.
This struct will conform to the AppIntent protocol, which
handles the action triggered by the button.
struct ToggleButton: AppIntent {  // ...}
Now, let’s fill in the ToggleButton struct to define how the action
will work.
The title and description below are used by the system to
describe the intent:
struct ToggleButton: AppIntent {
    static var title = LocalizedStringResource("Complete Task")
    static var description = IntentDescription("Mark a task as completed.")
    @Parameter(title: "Task ID")
    var id: String
    init() {}
    init(id: String) {
        self.id = id
    }
    func perform() async throws -> some IntentResult {
        let context = try ModelContext(.init(for: TaskItem.self))
        let descriptor = FetchDescriptor(
            predicate: #Predicate<TaskItem>{ $0.taskID == id }
        )
        if let task = try context.fetch(descriptor).first {
            task.isCompleted.toggle()
            try context.save()
        }
        return .result()
    }}

--- Page 269 ---
When adding parameters to the AppIntent struct, we need to use
the @Parameter attribute. One parameter called id is defined.
Notice there are two init() methods defined. The empty init is
required to conform to the AppIntent protocol, while the other is
used when we send the intent from the widget.
Finally, the perform() function is the instruction that will be
executed when the intent is received. Here, we simply query
SwiftData using the context.fetch() method, searching for the
task with taskID that matches our id parameter. When the task
is found, we change the status.
With the intent now implemented, the next step is to trigger it
when the widget button is tapped.
Here’s how to connect the ToggleButton intent to the Button:
Button(intent: ToggleButton(id: task.taskID)) {
    Image(systemName: "circle")
}
.font(.callout)
.buttonBorderShape(.circle)
At this point, the button is functional, allowing users to toggle
the task’s status directly from the widget.
However, there’s still one more issue that needs to be addressed
to make the interaction perfect.

--- Page 270 ---
Synchronizing Changes Between Widget and
App
Try to tap on the widget’s circle button to complete a task, then
open the Taskly app.
You will notice that the task you just marked as completed is not
shown as completed:
This is because while the underlying SwiftData has changed, the
app doesn’t know about the change, and the query is not
reloaded. To see the changes, you need to remove the app from
memory.
To make the app refresh when a task is completed by the
widget, add a scenePhase to the SingleTaskView as follows:
@Environment(\.scenePhase) var scenePhase

--- Page 271 ---
HStack {}
.onChange(of: scenePhase) { _, newValue in
    if newValue == .inactive {
        task.title = task.title
    }
}
The scenePhase retrieved from the environment is used to
observe the current state of the app.
Combined with the onChange() modifier, you can check whether
the app is active, inactive, or in background.
When the app enters .inactive state, the task.title is simply
reassigned to make SwiftUI fetch the latest SwiftData.
Now when you check a task from the widget, the list view will
be updated.
Next, try to create, update, or delete a task from the app, then
return to the home screen to see the widget. You’ll notice that
the widget doesn’t reload the task data:

--- Page 272 ---
To reload the widget view when the SwiftData is updated, you
need to import the WidgetKit framework and call the
WidgetCenter.shared.reloadAllTimelines() method.
There are three places where you need to add this code: The
TaskListView when deleting a task:
import WidgetKit
func removeTask(taskToDelete: TaskItem) {    withAnimation {        modelContext.delete(taskToDelete)    }    WidgetCenter.shared.reloadAllTimelines()}
Then the TaskFormView after adding or updating a task:
import WidgetKit
// In save button:if validate {    if taskToEdit != nil {

--- Page 273 ---
        updateTask()    } else {        addTask()    }    WidgetCenter.shared.reloadAllTimelines()    dismiss()}
And the SingleTaskView when the task status is toggled:
import WidgetKit
// Toggle status button:Button {
    withAnimation(){        task.isCompleted.toggle()    }    WidgetCenter.shared.reloadAllTimelines()} label: {    Image(systemName: task.isCompleted ? "checkmark.circle.fill" : "circle")        .foregroundColor(Color.blue)}
With that, the widget view will refresh when you make changes
to the app.
Specifying Widget Size
If you try to place all available widget sizes on the home screen,
you will see that the widget is too small on the .systemSmall size
and too large on the .systemLarge size:

--- Page 274 ---
To restrict the widget size available for the app, you can set the
supportedFamilies() modifier when creating the
StaticConfiguration() object:
StaticConfiguration() {
    // ...}.supportedFamilies([.systemMedium])
The code above will enable only the medium size widget on the
home screen.
To enable the widget in the lock screen, you can add
.accessoryRectangular, .accessoryCircular, or .accessoryInline
as follows:
.supportedFamilies([.systemMedium, .accessoryRectangular])
But if you try to add the widget to the lock screen, you will
realize that the lock screen widget size is too small to display
the task information effectively:

--- Page 275 ---
Let’s just remove the .accessoryRectangular from the
supportedFamilies list.
Now you have successfully added the widget extension to the
application. Congratulations!
Summary
The code added in this chapter is available in the Chapter18
folder in the source code.
You’ve learned how to add a widget extension to an iOS app
project and explored the generated widget code. The
WidgetBundle serves as the entry point for the widget, while the
getTimeline() function handles data retrieval and updates.
Next, we explored how to use the AppIntents framework to
update SwiftData entries via the widget button.

--- Page 276 ---
Lastly, we explored how to keep the app and widget interface in
sync with changes in underlying data. The reloadAllTimelines()
function instructs the widget to reload data, while the
.onChange(of: scenePhase) modifier enables the app to refresh
data.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 277 ---
CHAPTER 19: PUBLISHING TO
APP STORE
Now that the iOS application has been completed, it’s time to
learn how to publish the app to the Apple App Store.
This chapter will guide you step-by-step through the process of
preparing your app for submission and successfully passing
Apple review standards.
Creating App Icon
Before you can publish the app, make sure that you have added
an app icon to the project.
In Xcode, open the Assets folder and select AppIcon. You can
drag and drop the icon on the Any Appearance box, or double-
click the box to open the file explorer window:

--- Page 278 ---
The icon should be a square 1024 x 1024 pixels in size. Xcode
will handle resizing the icon for all kinds of devices and
appearances.
And that’s it. Now you are ready to publish the app.
Uploading Application Build to App Store
Connect
To publish an iOS application, you need to have a paid Apple
Developer account, which you can get at
https://developer.apple.com.
Once your paid account is active, open Xcode and make sure
the project is targeted on the main app (not the widget
extension) and set destination to Any iOS Device:

--- Page 279 ---
You need to create an app archive by selecting Product >
Archive on the top bar.
Xcode may ask for permission to access your development key,
so enter your login keychain password when prompted:
Once the archive process is finished, you will see the app listed
in the Archives menu as shown below:

--- Page 280 ---
If you accidentally close the Archives window, select Window >
Organizer from the top bar to open it again.
Select the app archive to publish, then click Distribute App
button.
For the distribution method, select App Store Connect, then
click Distribute:

--- Page 281 ---
Xcode will try to register the app to App Store Connect, so you
need to fill in the app record as shown below:
The Name info will be the application name displayed in the
app store, so it must not be taken by other apps in the app store.

--- Page 282 ---
SKU is an identifier for reporting purposes.
Primary Language sets the main language used by your app,
and the bundle identifier is a unique identifier for your
application.
Once the information is completed, click Next, and you will be
shown more options:
1. Check Upload app symbol and Manage Version and
Build Number, then click Next
2. Select Automatically manage signing, then click Next
You will arrive on the Review app content screen. Click
Upload.
When the upload process is finished, you will see the following
screen:


--- Page 283 ---
You can click the link to open App Store Connect, or just open
your browser and go to https://appstoreconnect.apple.com/.
Either way, the Xcode part in publishing the app is finished.
Filling App Information in App Store Connect
The App Store Connect is the platform where you can manage
your applications. On this platform, you can publish your app
to the App Store, reply to reviews, see analytics and sales
reports, and many more.
Go to https://appstoreconnect.apple.com/ and login using your
developer account, then click the Apps or My Apps menu.
Here, you should see the uploaded application listed:
On the application page, scroll down until you see the build
section as follows:

--- Page 284 ---
The Xcode build you uploaded in the previous section will
appear here once the process is completed. It might take a few
minutes before the build appears.
While waiting for the build to show up, you can fill in the
details required to publish the application, such as screenshots:


--- Page 285 ---
The screenshots of your app are required only for iPhone
demonstration. The iPad demo is optional.
To create the screenshots, you can run the app on a simulator,
then click the screenshot button as shown below:
The screenshots should be saved in your Desktop.
After adding screenshots, there is more information to fill in,
such as Description, Keywords, Support URL, Copyright, .etc.
Another important section to fill in is the App Review
Information section, where you can provide login information
for the reviewers:
This login information is used by Apple to login into your app. If
your app doesn’t have any login mechanism, just uncheck the
Sign-in required checkbox and you’re good to go.

--- Page 286 ---
Don’t forget to click the Save button on the top right just beside
the Add for Review button to save app information.
After a few minutes have passed, refresh the page and check
whether the build has been uploaded to Apple server. You
should see a button to choose build as follows:
Click the button, then select the build you want to use in this
submission.
Now you might get a notice that says missing compliance in
build status after selecting your app. This is usually because
Apple needs you to inform them about the algorithms used in
your app.
Click the Manage button to see the following options:

--- Page 287 ---
If your app doesn’t use any algorithms, just select None of the
algorithms mentioned above and click Save.
There are two more important sections you need to fill out
before submitting for review: the Pricing and Availability and
App Privacy sections.
These sections should be simple enough to understand, so you
can navigate there using the sidebar.
Once you’re done, click the Prepare for Submission link, then
click Add for Review.
The status of your app should change to Waiting For Review as
shown below:

--- Page 288 ---
This means you have successfully submitted your app for
review. The process might take up to 24 hours, but can be
slower if there are many submissions.
If the app doesn’t pass the review, you will be notified by email.
Apple will let you know what to fix before submitting again.
Summary
The changes committed in this chapter can be found in
Chapter19, but it’s only adding an icon to the app.
A few years ago, the app store submission process was more
complicated as developers needed to sign the app with
certificates manually to secure it, and you needed to create an
app record in the App Store Connect before uploading from
Xcode.
These days, the process has improved significantly, as Xcode
can sign the app and create an app record in App Store Connect
automatically.
If you do submit an app, I wish you the best of luck, and may
your app be successful.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 289 ---
SECTION 3: LEGACY IOS
DEVELOPMENT TOPICS
If you’re aspiring to be an iOS developer, it’s essential to
recognize that many existing projects still use UIKit, Apple’s
earlier UI framework.
Although SwiftUI is gaining traction, you may still encounter
UIKit projects in your work. A solid understanding of UIKit is
crucial for your success as a developer.
In this section, we will explore key aspects of legacy iOS
development, focusing on techniques used with UIKit and
related tools. Here’s what we’ll cover:
 ▪ Chapter 20: Introduction to UIKit and Storyboard
 ▪ Chapter 21: Storyboard Segue, Swipe Actions, and
TableViewCell
 
▪
 
Chapter 22: UIKit Programmatic Interface
 ▪ Chapter 23: Getting Started With Core Data

--- Page 290 ---
Throughout these chapters, we’ll build a simplified version of
Taskly, a task management app, as a hands-on project to apply
what you’ve learned. This project will help you gain practical
experience with UIKit, Storyboards, and Core Data.
By the end of this section, you’ll have a better understanding of
legacy iOS development tools and techniques, giving you the
foundation to work on older projects with confidence.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 291 ---
CHAPTER 20: INTRODUCTION TO
UIKIT AND STORYBOARD
Before SwiftUI, iOS development primarily used the UIKit
framework to build user interfaces.
Like SwiftUI, UIKit enables developers to create and manage
graphical components in iOS apps, but they take different
approaches. The key distinction is that UIKit follows an
imperative approach, while SwiftUI uses a declarative approach.
The imperative approach requires you to explicitly define the
steps to achieve an outcome, including creating a smaller view
and attaching it to the parent view manually.
To show you an example, let’s compare how to create a button
in UIKit and SwiftUI:
// UIKit button
let button = UIButton(type: .system)
button.setTitle("Tap Me", for: .normal)
button.addTarget(self, action: #selector(buttonTapped), for: .touchUpInside)
view.addSubview(button)
@objc func buttonTapped() {
    print("Button Tapped!")
}

--- Page 292 ---
// SwiftUI button
Button("Tap Me") {
    print("Button Tapped!")
}
In UIKit, creating a button requires multiple steps. First, you
create an instance of the UIButton class, then set its title, define
a target function that specifies what happens when the button
is tapped, and finally add the button to the parent view with
view.addSubview().
On the other hand, SwiftUI simplifies the process by allowing
you to define both the button and its action in a single line of
code.
You can directly place the Button struct within the parent view
and specify the action using a closure, significantly reducing the
amount of code when compared to UIKit.
Creating a UIKit-based Project
Let’s start by creating a UIKit-based project in Xcode. Similar to
creating a SwiftUI-based project, you need to click the Create
New Project…  option in Xcode, select iOS template, choose
App, then click Next:

--- Page 293 ---
Next, you need to fill in the details of your project.
Input 'TasklyUIKit' for the Product Name and 'com.your name
or website' for the Organization Identifier, then uncheck the
Include Tests option as shown below:

--- Page 294 ---
Click Next, and you will be asked where to save the project. Feel
free to save the project on your Desktop or Document folders.
Now Xcode will generate a starter UIKit application for you, so
let’s explore it first.
The AppDelegate file is responsible for managing the lifecycle of
the app, including initial setup, launch, termination, and
interaction with the iOS system. This file also serves as the main
entry point of the app.
The SceneDelegate file manages the lifecycle of a scene (or view)
such as when a scene is opened, closed, or resumed.
The ViewController is used to handle the presentation of views,
user interactions, and manage transitions between different

--- Page 295 ---
views. A view controller is usually attached to a scene in
Storyboard.
The Main.storyboard file is where you design the primary user
interface (UI) of your app. A view is called scene in Storyboard.
The LaunchScreen is used to display a static launch screen while
your app is starting up. It is typically a placeholder screen that
mimics the first screen of your app’s UI or has a simple
branding image or animation.
Finally, there’s the Info.plist file which stores the app
configuration, such as the name of the Storyboard used by the
app.
If you open the Main.storyboard file, you will see a single scene
called View Controller Scene displayed.
Click on the scene name, then open the Identity inspector to the
right. You will see the ViewController class listed as the custom
class:

--- Page 296 ---
The custom class links the scene you create in the Storyboard to
code, allowing you to add custom instructions to the scene.
Let’s begin by creating the interface of our app with Storyboard.
Creating Storyboard Scenes and Navigation
First, you need to embed the initial view into a Navigation
Controller to manage the navigation flow.
In the Storyboard interface, select the View Controller Scene,
then click Editor > Embed In > Navigation Controller as
shown below:

--- Page 297 ---
The Navigation Controller becomes a container that contains all
app scenes. The navigation bar at the top of the screen will
always be shown for all scenes you add to this Storyboard.
Still on the View Controller Scene, select Navigation Item and
add the Title attribute as follows:

--- Page 298 ---
Next, open the objects library by clicking on the plus '+' icon just
beside the cloud icon, or press the Command + Shift + L shortcut.
In the library menu, search for a Bar Button Item and add it to
the Task List navigation item as shown below:

--- Page 299 ---
Next, you need to modify that button attributes to show a '+'
symbol for adding tasks:
With the 'Add Task' button added, you need to create a second
scene that will show the Task Form.

--- Page 300 ---
Open the objects library again, search for a 'View Controller',
then drag it out to the Storyboard to create a new scene:
To name this scene, open the Navigation Item element and add
fill the Title attribute as 'Task Form'.
Next, you need to connect the 'Add Task' button and the new
scene. Press and hold the Control button, then click on the Add
Task button and drag it to the Task Form Scene:

--- Page 301 ---
A segue pop-up menu will appear. This is where you define how
the transition should happen between the two scenes:


--- Page 302 ---
The Show option will slide a new screen on top of the previous
one, just like how you used the .navigationDestination()
modifier in SwiftUI.
The Present Modally option is similar to the .sheets()
modifier, where the next scene is presented in a modal.
Just select Show for the transition. If you run the application
now, you can already test the navigation from Task List Scene to
Task Form Scene.
Creating the TaskItem Class
To save task data in this app, you need to create the TaskItem
class just like the previous SwiftUI-based app.
Create a new Swift file called TaskItem and add the code below:
class TaskItem {    var title: String    var isCompleted: Bool
    init(title: String, isCompleted: Bool){        self.title = title        self.isCompleted = isCompleted    }
}
This class will be simplified so that we can focus on Storyboard
and UIKit rather than managing the data.
Adding and Connecting TableView to
ViewController
Let’s add a Table View so that we can display the task data.

--- Page 303 ---
Back in the Main Storyboard, open the objects library and add a
Table View to the Task List Scene:
Next, add constraints to the Table View using the Add New
Constraints menu on the bottom right part of the editor:

--- Page 304 ---
Add '0' as constraint to the four sides of the view so that the
table view will occupy the whole screen.
Open the objects library again, then add a Table View Cell to
the table view. Select the table view cell and set the Identifier
attribute to taskCell as follows:
The table view cell represents a single row in the table view.
Each table view cell will display a single task data.

--- Page 305 ---
Before proceeding, let’s rename the ViewController class to
better reflect the class content and avoid confusion. Right-click
the class name then select Refactor > Rename… :
Change the class name to TaskListViewController and click the
Rename button.


--- Page 306 ---
The next step is to connect the table view to the
TaskListViewController class.
Open the Main Storyboard file again. Select the Task List Scene,
then click on the Adjust Editor button and select the Assistant
menu as shown below:
The assistant window will show up, displaying the Swift file
related to the scene.
Here, you need to drag the table view to the Swift file:

--- Page 307 ---
A small pop-up window will appear for configuring the outlet
detail. Enter the Name of the outlet as taskTableView and set the
Storage type to Strong:
With that, the table view outlet should appear in your Swift file:
@IBOutlet var taskTableView: UITableView!
Now the table view is connected to the TaskListViewController
class.
Configuring taskTableView Data Source and
Delegate
To control the data and interaction with the taskTableView from
TaskListViewController class, you need to set the data source

--- Page 308 ---
and delegate outlets of the table view to the class.
You can do this by selecting the Task Table View in the Task
List Scene, then open the Connections Inspector as shown
below:
Click the dataSource outlet circle button and drag it to the Task
List icon:
And do the same for the delegate outlet. This will connect the
outlet like this:
Now you need to update the TaskListViewController class to
show some data in the table view.

--- Page 309 ---
Open the TaskListViewController class and add two protocols to
the class:
class TaskListViewController: UIViewController, UITableViewDataSource,
UITableViewDelegate {}
Xcode will show an error. Click on that error and select Add
stubs for conformance to fix it.
You should see two functions generated as follows:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int {
    <#code#>
}
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UITableViewCell {
    <#code#>
}
The numberOfRowsInSection method tells the table view how
many cells to display, while the cellForRowAt method controls
what to display in each cell.
Now we want to show the TaskItem data in the table view, but
since we don’t have a database implemented, let’s use an array
instead.
Add an array to the TaskListViewController class as follows:
var tasks: [TaskItem] = [    TaskItem(title: "Learn Swimming", isCompleted: false),    TaskItem(title: "Learn Storyboard", isCompleted: true),    TaskItem(title: "Learn UIKit", isCompleted: false)]

--- Page 310 ---
Then return the tasks.count property value in the
numberOfRowsInSection method:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) ->Int {    tasks.count}
After that, update the cellForRowAt method to display the task
title in each cell as follows:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UITableViewCell {    let cell = taskTableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "taskCell",for: indexPath)    cell.textLabel?.text = tasks[indexPath.row].title    return cell}
The dequeueReusableCell() method reuses the table cell that has
a specific identifier property (the withIdentifier argument)
The for argument in the method specifies the location in the
table view for which this cell will be displayed. In most cases,
you want to display the cell in indexPath, which defaults to the
table row.
The cell.textLabel?.text controls the label of the cell, and
tasks[indexPath.row].title accesses the title property of the
tasks array’s element at the current row.
The cell is then returned to the table view which will display it
on the screen.
With the data source and view cell completed, you can run the
application and see the array data displayed in table view as

--- Page 311 ---
follows:
Let’s take a short break before developing the application
further.

--- Page 312 ---
Summary
The code for this chapter is available in the Chapter20 folder of
the source code.
In this chapter, you utilized UIKit and Storyboard to recreate a
part of the Taskly app, specifically by adding a navigation bar
and displaying data in a list.
At this point, you may find that working with UIKit and
Storyboard involves many steps, which can be intimidating for
first-time users. You need to create a view controller scene,
connect it to a view controller class, add view elements to the
screen, and define layout constraints.
Next, you need to link these view elements to your custom class
through outlets, and then write the code to handle user
interactions, such as button clicks, as well as to populate table
views.
Using Storyboard’s graphical interface builder can also be
challenging, as it requires you to remember where various
attributes and configurations are located.
Improving your skills with UIKit and Storyboard will take some
time and practice, so please be patient with yourself.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 313 ---
CHAPTER 21: STORYBOARD
SEGUE, SWIPE ACTIONS, AND
TABLEVIEWCELL
In this chapter, you will configure the Task Form Scene to
accept user input and use a segue to send that data back to the
Task List Scene. You’ll also implement swipe actions for
enhanced functionality.
Additionally, you’ll create a custom class for the table view cell,
allowing you to program the button that toggles the task status.
These exercises will help you become more comfortable using
UIKit.
Finishing the Task Form Scene
First, you need to add elements to the Task Form Scene that will
receive inputs.
Open the objects library, then add a Text Field object to the
Task Form. Set the Placeholder attribute as 'Task Title' and add
constraints to the element (80, 20, 20) as follows:

--- Page 314 ---
Next, you need to add a label to the scene for the toggle button.
Set the Text attribute as 'Completed' and add two constraints
(40, 20) as follows:

--- Page 315 ---
Make sure that the top constraint is set relative to the Task Title
field as shown above.
Now open the objects library again and search for the 'switch'
button. Add it to the scene, then set the State to Off and add 3
constraints (40, 220, 20) as shown below:

--- Page 316 ---
When you add the leading (left) constraint, the same constraint
will automatically apply to the label, making the spacing
consistent.
These elements are enough for the simplified task data we use
in this app. The next step is to add the switch label and button
to a horizontal stack.
Select the switch label and button from the Storyboard
document outline, then click the Embed In button as follows:

--- Page 317 ---
The Embed In button shows the same options as the one in the
Editor menu. Select Stack View to put the elements in a
horizontal stack view, just like the HStack in SwiftUI.
Next, select the text field and the newly created stack view, then
embed them in a stack view again to create a VStack:


--- Page 318 ---
After that, change the background color of the form view to
System Gray 6 as shown below:
To make the form stand out, change the background color of the
vertical stack to System Background Color:


--- Page 319 ---
Next, we need to add some constraints to the vertical stack:
As well as some margins to make the view more visually
appealing:


--- Page 320 ---
The form is completed, so the only thing left is to add a button
on the navigation bar to save the task:
We have finished creating the interface for the Task Form
Scene. In the next section, we will connect this scene with a
view controller class and provide the code for validating and
processing task data.
Adding the TaskFormViewController Class
It’s time to create the view controller class for the task form.
Press Command + N to open the template selection window and
select Cocoa Touch Class:

--- Page 321 ---
Set the Subclass of option to UIViewController and Class to
'TaskFormViewController':

--- Page 322 ---
Xcode will generate the class file for you. Open the Storyboard,
select the Task Form, and add the custom class in the Attributes
sidebar:


--- Page 323 ---
The scene and the class are now connected. Open the assistant
window, and create outlets for the text field and switch button.
Press the Control button and drag the elements to the class:
You also need to create the action for when the user taps on the
save button, so drag the save button to the class and create an
action like this:
This will create an @IBAction method as follows:

--- Page 324 ---
@IBAction func didTapSaveTask(_ sender: Any) {}
The first thing we want to do is to validate the inputs when the
save button is tapped, so let’s add a validate computed property
as follows:
var validate: Bool {
    guard taskTitle.text?.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).isEmpty != true
    else {
        return false
    }
    return true
}
The taskTitle.text property is how you access the value of the
text field.
Next, update the didTapSaveTask() method as follows:
@IBAction func didTapSaveTask(_ sender: Any) {  if validate {      performSegue(withIdentifier: "unwindToTaskList", sender: self)  } else {      let alert = UIAlertController(title: "Validation Error", message: "TaskTitle cannot be empty.", preferredStyle: .alert)      alert.addAction(UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .default))      present(alert, animated: true)  }}
When validate returns true, a segue is triggered using the
performSegue() function. Otherwise, an alert box is shown to the
user, saying the task title must not be empty.
Next, you need to prepare the data before the segue is executed.
This is done by overriding the prepare() method:
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) {
    if segue.identifier == "unwindToTaskList" {

--- Page 325 ---
        let title = taskTitle.text ?? ""
        let isCompleted = taskStatus.isOn
        newTask = TaskItem(title: title, isCompleted: isCompleted)
    }}
This prepare() method will be called every time a segue is
performed from this class, and if the segue.identifier is
'unwindToTaskList', a new task is created from the input data.
You need to add the newTask property to the class:
class TaskFormViewController: UIViewController {    var newTask: TaskItem?}
With the data prepared for saving, the next step is to create an
unwind segue to navigate back to the Task List Scene.
Saving Data With Unwind Segue
You need to save new task data in the tasks array.
In the TaskListViewController class, create a new @IBAction
method as follows:
@IBAction func unwindToTaskList(segue: UIStoryboardSegue) {
    if let sourceViewController = segue.source as? TaskFormViewController {
        if let newTask = sourceViewController.newTask {
            tasks.append(newTask)
            taskTableView.reloadData()
        }
    }
}
This method will check for the segue source, and when the
source is TaskFormViewController, it will check for the existence
of the newTask object, which it will append to the tasks array,

--- Page 326 ---
then refresh the table view with the taskTableView.reloadData()
method.
Now you need to link this method with the 'Save Task' button
from the Storyboard.
In the Storyboard editor, drag the Task Form to its own Exit
icon like this:
There will only be one Action Segue, which is the @IBAction you
created earlier.
Next, add the Identifier attribute to the segue as follows:

--- Page 327 ---
The Identifier is used by the Task Form to prepare the task
data for saving.
And that’s it. If you run the app now, you should be able to add
a new task to the table view. When the task title is empty, an
alert pop-up window will appear.
But because the tasks data is saved in an array, the updated
data will disappear when you restart the app.
Implementing Swipe Actions
To implement swipe actions to the table view cell, you only
need to add the tableView functions for swiping.
Here’s how to create the delete button when you swipe from the
trailing (end) side of the cell:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,
trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->
UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {
    let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style: .destructive, title: "Delete")
{
        (_, _, completionHandler) in

--- Page 328 ---
        self.tasks.remove(at: indexPath.row)
        tableView.deleteRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic)
        completionHandler(true)
    }
    let swipeConfiguration = UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions:
[deleteAction])
    swipeConfiguration.performsFirstActionWithFullSwipe = false
    return swipeConfiguration
}
The trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt function
configures the button when we swipe from the trailing side.
In this function, we create an instance of the UIContextualAction
class, which will create the swipe button. The body of the
function will be executed when the button is tapped.
Next, we create a UISwipeActionsConfiguration() instance, from
which we can set multiple swipe buttons. Here, we pass the
actions argument as deleteAction since it’s the only button we
need.
The configuration is then returned from this method to the
table view, which connects the configuration with the cell.
We need to do the same with the swipe 'Edit' button:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,leadingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {    let editAction = UIContextualAction(style: .normal, title: "Edit") {        (_, _, completionHandler) in
        self.performSegue(withIdentifier: "taskFormSegue", sender: indexPath)        completionHandler(true)    }
    editAction.backgroundColor = UIColor(.green)
    let swipeConfiguration = UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions: [editAction])

--- Page 329 ---
    swipeConfiguration.performsFirstActionWithFullSwipe = false
    return swipeConfiguration}
The 'Edit' button is put on the leading (beginning) side, so we
need to use the leadingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt
function to configure the button.
Here, we create another UIContextualAction instance which
performs a segue to the task form.
The identifier of the segue is 'taskFormSegue', so let’s define a
prepare() function that takes this identifier into account:
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) {
    if segue.identifier == "taskFormSegue" {
        if let destinationVC = segue.destination as? TaskFormViewController,
            let indexPath = sender as? IndexPath {
            destinationVC.taskToEdit = tasks[indexPath.row]
        }    }}
Here, we check the identifier, the destination view controller,
and the sender of the segue. When the conditions are fulfilled,
we set the taskToEdit property of the destinationVC to the
swiped task.
After that, update the unwindToTaskList() method to reload the
table view when taskToEdit is not nil:
@IBAction func unwindToTaskList(segue: UIStoryboardSegue) {    if let sourceViewController = segue.source as? TaskFormViewController {        if let newTask = sourceViewController.newTask {            tasks.append(newTask)            taskTableView.reloadData()        } else if sourceViewController.taskToEdit != nil {            taskTableView.reloadData()        }

--- Page 330 ---
    }}
Now you need to navigate to the TaskFormViewController class
and add the taskToEdit property to accept data passed from the
task list:
var taskToEdit: TaskItem?
Next, update the viewDidLoad() method to modify the value of
taskTitle and taskStatus when taskToEdit is not nil:
override func viewDidLoad() {    super.viewDidLoad()
    // Do any additional setup after loading the view.    if let task = taskToEdit {        taskTitle.text = task.title        taskStatus.isOn = task.isCompleted    }}
Now update the prepare() method to modify the taskToEdit data
when the property is not nil. Otherwise, create a new task:
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) {    if segue.identifier == "unwindToTaskList" {        let title = taskTitle.text ?? ""        let isCompleted = taskStatus.isOn        if let task = taskToEdit {            task.title = title            task.isCompleted = isCompleted        } else {            newTask = TaskItem(title: title, isCompleted: isCompleted)
        }    }}
Finally, add the Identifier attribute for the segue from Task List
to Task Form:

--- Page 331 ---
Now you should be able to edit and delete tasks from the app.
Creating a Custom TableViewCell
The last thing we need to do is to add a custom class for the
table view cell.
You need to create a new Cocoa Touch Class file that extends the
UITableViewCell class as shown below:

--- Page 332 ---
Connect this class to the taskCell view in the Storyboard:
Next, add a label and a button to the Storyboard. Put both
objects vertically centered in the cell using the Align button:

--- Page 333 ---
For the label, add a leading constraint of 20 points:
For the button, add a trailing constraint of 20 points:

--- Page 334 ---
Additionally, empty the Title attribute of the button, and set the
Image to circle as follows:
With the cell elements ready, open the assistant view and create
an outlet for the label and the button. Set the Storage option to
weak:

--- Page 335 ---
The weak var reference is used so that references to the
properties are removed from memory when the cell is off-
screen. It optimizes the memory management of the app.
Next, create an IBAction for the button named
'didTapTaskStatus' as follows:
This is where the action to change the task status will be added.

--- Page 336 ---
In the assistant editor, add code to assign the value of task title
and status button:
var task: TaskItem? {    didSet {        guard let task = task else { return }        taskTitle.text = task.title        let imageName = task.isCompleted ? "checkmark.circle.fill" : "circle"        taskStatus.setImage(UIImage(systemName: imageName), for: .normal)    }}
The didSet property observer will run the code whenever the
property is defined in the class.
You also need to define a function property that will be
executed when the didTapTaskStatus function is executed:
var toggleCompletion: (() -> Void)?
@IBAction func didTapTaskStatus(_ sender: Any) {    toggleCompletion?()}
Close the assistant editor, then open the TaskListViewController
and update the cellForRowAt function as shown below:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UITableViewCell {    let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "taskCell", for:indexPath) as! SingleTaskCell
    cell.task = tasks[indexPath.row]    cell.toggleCompletion = { [weak self] in
        self?.tasks[indexPath.row].isCompleted.toggle()        tableView.reloadRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic)    }    return cell}
The as! SingleTaskCell line converts the cell returned by
dequeueReusableCell() to an instance of SingleTaskCell.

--- Page 337 ---
This ensures we have access to the properties of the
SingleTaskCell class as we assign the task property with
cell.task and toggleCompletion with `toggleCompletion.
In the toggleCompletion property, we simply toggle the
isCompleted value of the task, then reload the table cell for that
task.
And that’s it. Now you can see the task status from the task list
and tap the button to change it.
Summary
The code for this chapter is available in the Chapter21 folder of
the source code.
In this chapter, you learned how to use the Storyboard
Interface Builder to create a form, as well as configure both
forward and unwind segues.
You also learned how to add swipe actions to table view cells
and how to create a custom cell that can be programmatically
controlled. This allows you to modify task data using a button
embedded within the custom cell.
With this chapter, you should have a clearer understanding of
how to use Storyboard to design user interfaces and connect
them to view controller classes for adding code.
It’s worth noting that depending on the development team
you’re working with, some iOS developers may prefer to skip
Storyboard in favor of building the user interface
programmatically.

--- Page 338 ---
This is why we will dive into programmatic UI development
with UIKit in the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 339 ---
CHAPTER 22: UIKIT
PROGRAMMATIC INTERFACE
In professional iOS development, many developers prefer
building user interfaces programmatically rather than using
Storyboards because Storyboards are stored as XML files, which
are difficult to manage in version control systems like Git. Even
minor changes, such as accidentally moving a view by one
pixel, can lead to merge conflicts.
Additionally, Storyboards can become large and difficult to
navigate as projects grow, making it hard to manage multiple
views. In contrast, programmatic UI offers simpler control and
flexibility, which improves productivity and helps keep the code
organized.
Debugging is also simpler with programmatic UI, as the layout
and logic are clearly defined in the code. With Storyboards, you
might need to open the visual editor and locate the problem
across multiple panels.
Is it the attribute, size, or identity inspector you should check?
And which element is causing the problem exactly? debugging
in Storyboards can be very cumbersome.

--- Page 340 ---
This is why, in this chapter, you’ll learn how to create scenes
and UI elements programmatically, navigate between them
without using Storyboards, and define layout constraints
directly in code.
You’ll also explore using the delegate pattern as an alternative
to segues for handling navigation and communication between
view controllers.
Programmatic Scenes, Elements, and
Navigation
Let’s create a new iOS project that uses UIKit and Swift as in
Chapter 20. Name this project as 'TasklyUIKitX' as follows:


--- Page 341 ---
Once the project is generated, the first thing to do is to right-
click the Main storyboard and delete it.
You also need to remove the reference to the Main storyboard in
the Info.plist file as shown below:
Then remove one more reference in the Xcode project Build
Settings in the UIKit Main Storyboard File Base Name value
as follows:

--- Page 342 ---
Now that all references to the storyboard file are removed,
open the SceneDelegate file as this is where you can launch the
first screen.
Inside the willConnectTo() method, create a new UIWindow and
assign a UINavigationController as its rootViewController() as
shown below:
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, willConnectTo session: UISceneSession, options
connectionOptions: UIScene.ConnectionOptions) {
    guard let windowScene = (scene as? UIWindowScene) else { return }
    let window = UIWindow(windowScene: windowScene)
    window.rootViewController = UINavigationController(rootViewController:
TaskListViewController())
}
In the code above, the TaskListViewController is set as the root
view of the UINavigationController, which is set as the root view

--- Page 343 ---
of the UIWindow.
Just below the window.rootViewController assignment, attach the
newly created window to the SceneDelegate.window property,
then show that window using the makeKeyAndVisible() method:
self.window = windowwindow.makeKeyAndVisible()
This way, the app will run the TaskListViewController class and
render everything inside it.
You need to refactor and rename the ViewController into
TaskListViewController, then modify the viewDidLoad() method
as follows:
import UIKit
class TaskListViewController: UIViewController {
    override func viewDidLoad() {
        super.viewDidLoad()
        // Do any additional setup after loading the view.
        title = "Task List"
        let rightBarButton = UIBarButtonItem(image: UIImage(systemName:
"plus"), style: .plain, target: self, action: #selector(didTapCreateTask))
        navigationItem.rightBarButtonItem = rightBarButton
        if let navigationBar = navigationController?.navigationBar {
            let appearance = UINavigationBarAppearance()
            appearance.backgroundColor = .systemGray6
            navigationBar.standardAppearance = appearance
            navigationBar.scrollEdgeAppearance = appearance
            navigationBar.compactAppearance = appearance
        }    }}
The title property will set the navigation title for the view.

--- Page 344 ---
The rightBarButton is an instance UIBarButtonItem which is used
to create a bar button. When this button is tapped, the action
argument of this object will be executed.
To place the button on the right side of the navigation bar, it
was assigned to the navigationItem.rightBarButtonItem
property.
The if let navigationBar line is used to get the navigationBar
instance and change the background color to systemGray6.
Next, create the didTapCreateTask() function needed by the bar
button:
@objc func didTapCreateTask() {
    let taskFormVC = TaskFormViewController()
    taskFormVC.title = "Task Form"
    navigationController?.pushViewController(taskFormVC, animated: true)
}
Now you need to create the TaskFormViewController, so create a
new Swift file, define the class, and extend the UIViewController
class.
For now, just set the title property of the class in the
viewDidLoad() method:
import UIKit
class TaskFormViewController: UIViewController {
    override func viewDidLoad() {        super.viewDidLoad()
        title = "Task Form"    }}

--- Page 345 ---
Save the changes, and you can run the app to test the
navigation control.
The view content will be all black because there’s no content
yet. We’ll change that in the next section.
Creating the Table View
Let’s create a table view for displaying task data
programmatically.
First, create the TaskItem class for storing task data as before:
class TaskItem {    var title: String    var isCompleted: Bool
    init(title: String, isCompleted: Bool){        self.title = title        self.isCompleted = isCompleted    }
}
Next, open the TaskListViewController class and create the tasks
and taskListTableView property as follows:
var tasks: [TaskItem] = [    TaskItem(title: "Learn Swimming", isCompleted: false),    TaskItem(title: "Learn Storyboard", isCompleted: true),    TaskItem(title: "Learn UIKit", isCompleted: false)
]
let taskListTableView: UITableView = {    let table = UITableView()    table.register(UITableViewCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier: "taskCell")    return table}()
The tasks property will serve as the dummy data to display in
the table view, while the taskListTableView creates a

--- Page 346 ---
UITableView instance that we can add to the view.
Inside the viewDidLoad() method, call the view.addSubview()
method and pass the table view as the argument:
view.addSubview(taskListTableView)
That should render the table view already, but you still need to
add constraints to the view.
Override the viewDidLayoutSubviews() function, then set the
table view frame to the view.bounds as shown below:
override func viewDidLayoutSubviews() {    super.viewDidLayoutSubviews()
    taskListTableView.frame = view.bounds}
The viewDidLayoutSubviews method is called after the
subviews have been laid out on the view. By setting the table
view’s frame to view.bounds, you ensure that the table view
extends to cover the entire screen.
The next step is to adopt the UITableViewDelegate and
UITableViewDataSource protocols to the class and configure the
required methods:
class TaskListViewController: UIViewController, UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource {}
Xcode will show an error, so click on that error and select Fix to
generate the method placeholders like before.
Simply return the tasks.count for the numberOfRowsInSection
method:

--- Page 347 ---
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -
> Int {
    tasks.count
}
In the cellForRowAt method, create a cell and use the
tasks.title property as the textLabel.text value:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UITableViewCell {    let cell = taskListTableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:"taskCell", for: indexPath)
    cell.textLabel?.text = tasks[indexPath.row].title
    return cell}
Finally, you need to point the table view delegate and
dataSource properties to self in the viewDidLoad() method:
view.addSubview(taskListTableView)taskListTableView.delegate = selftaskListTableView.dataSource = self
And that’s it. Now you can see the tasks displayed in the table
view. Isn’t it much easier compared to using Storyboard?
Creating the Task Form
With the table view done, let’s continue with the task form
view.
Inside the TaskFormViewController class, create three computed
properties for the title text field, status label, and status switch
button:
let taskTitleTextField: UITextField = {
    let textField = UITextField()

--- Page 348 ---
    textField.placeholder = "Task Title"
    textField.borderStyle = .roundedRect
    textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
    return textField
}()
let taskStatusLabel: UILabel = {
    let label = UILabel()
    label.text = "Completed"
    label.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
    return label
}()
let taskStatusSwitch: UISwitch = {
    let switchControl = UISwitch()
    switchControl.isOn = false
    switchControl.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
    return switchControl
}()
Next, add them as subviews in the viewDidLoad() method. Also
add the right bar button item while we’re at it:
view.backgroundColor = .white // set view background color
let rightBarButton = UIBarButtonItem(title: "Save Task", style: .plain,
target: self, action: #selector(didTapSaveTask))
navigationItem.rightBarButtonItem = rightBarButton
view.addSubview(taskTitleTextField)
view.addSubview(taskStatusLabel)
view.addSubview(taskStatusSwitch)
Now we need to provide the didTapSaveTask() function for the
right bar button item, so add the following code below the
viewDidLoad method. It should be very familiar by now:
@objc func didTapSaveTask() {    if validate {        let title = taskTitleTextField.text ?? ""        let isCompleted = taskStatusSwitch.isOn        // TODO: Send task back to task list with delegate    } else {

--- Page 349 ---
        let alert = UIAlertController(title: "Validation Error", message: "TaskTitle cannot be empty.", preferredStyle: .alert)        alert.addAction(UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .default))        present(alert, animated: true)    }}
var validate: Bool {    guard taskTitleTextField.text?.trimmingCharacters(in: .whitespaces).isEmpty!= true    else {        return false    }    return true}
When the validate computed property is true the view needs to
create a new TaskItem instance and return it to the task list
view.
The didTapSaveTask() function is not finished yet as we still
need to append new task data to the tasks array in the task list
view, but we will postpone that for now because we need to
create programmatic constraints for the elements first.
Programmatic Constraints
When we create view elements programmatically, UIKit
automatically creates a set of constraints for that view. To
prevent UIKit from adding automatic constraints, we need to set
the translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints property to
false.
This has been done in all elements we created above:
textField.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false

--- Page 350 ---
To set the view constraints programmatically, let’s create a
function called setupConstraints().
In that function, call the NSLayoutConstraint.activate() method
and write the constraints for our elements:
func setupConstraints() {
    NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
        // Text Field constraints
        taskTitleTextField.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.safeAreaLayoutGuide.topAnchor, constant: 60),
        taskTitleTextField.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.leadingAnchor, constant: 20),
        taskTitleTextField.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.trailingAnchor, constant: -20),
        // Label constraints
        taskStatusLabel.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
taskTitleTextField.bottomAnchor, constant: 20),
        taskStatusLabel.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.leadingAnchor,
constant: 20),
        // Switch constraints
        taskStatusSwitch.centerYAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
taskStatusLabel.centerYAnchor),
        taskStatusSwitch.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo:
view.trailingAnchor, constant: -20)
    ])}
These constraints are fairly straightforward. First, you define
the constraints for the text field, with the top anchor set 60
points from the top anchor of the safe area (the screen from the
bottom of the navigation bar to the bottom edge of the screen)
After that, set the leading and trailing anchor (left and right
side) for 20 and -20 points respectively.
For the task status label, set the top constraint 20 points from
the bottom of the text field, and 20 points from the leading edge

--- Page 351 ---
of the safe area.
The task status switch button also has 2 anchors: the vertical
center anchor set equal to the label, and the trailing edge set to
-20 points.
To enable these constraints, just call the function in the
viewDidLoad() method as follows:
view.addSubview(taskTitleTextField)
view.addSubview(taskStatusLabel)
view.addSubview(taskStatusSwitch)
setupConstraints()
With the constraints setup, the last thing to do is to display new
task data in the table view.
In the previous chapter, we used a segue to send back data to
the task list. But since the segue is a feature of Storyboard, we
can’t use it when building UI programmatically.
We need to use the delegate pattern as an alternative to the
segue
Adding New Task Data With Delegate Pattern
The delegate pattern is used in classes or structures to hand off
(or delegate) a part of its responsibilities to other classes or
structs.
We have seen an example of this when we adopt the
UITableViewDelegate and UITableViewDataSource protocols in the
task list view.

--- Page 352 ---
These protocols enable the view to take responsibility for tasks
such as determining how many rows to render with
numberOfRowsInSection and configuring the content of each cell
with cellForRowAt.
The delegate pattern comes in handy when you know a class
needs to have a certain ability such as saving data, but that
class doesn’t have control over when and how the data is saved.
Let’s see a practical example. In the TaskFormViewController
class, create a protocol as follows:
protocol TaskFormDelegate: AnyObject {    func saveTask(_ newTask: TaskItem)}
In this delegate protocol, there is one function called saveTask()
that must be implemented by adopting classes. The _ in front of
the argument newTask is used so that the parameter name can
be omitted when calling the function.
To use this protocol in the task form, create a weak reference to
the delegate:
weak var delegate: TaskFormDelegate?
Then use the delegate inside the didTapSaveTask() function like
this:
if validate {    let title = taskTitleTextField.text ?? ""    let isCompleted = taskStatusSwitch.isOn
    let newTask = TaskItem(title: title, isCompleted: isCompleted)    delegate?.saveTask(newTask)    navigationController?.popViewController(animated: true)}

--- Page 353 ---
First, we create the newTask object from the input values, then
we call the delete.saveTask() function and pass the newTask to it.
The optional chain ?. is used on the call so that no fatal error
happens nothing adopts the delegate.
After that, we simply use
navigationController?.popViewController() to return to the task
list view.
Next, adopt the protocol in the TaskListViewController class.
You can do this in an extension as follows:
extension TaskListViewController: TaskFormDelegate {    func saveTask(_ newTask: TaskItem) {        tasks.append(newTask)    }}
Then set the taskFormVC.delegate property to self in the
didTapCreateTask() function:
@objc func didTapCreateTask() {    let taskFormVC = TaskFormViewController()    taskFormVC.title = "Task Form"    taskFormVC.delegate = self // set delegate as self    navigationController?.pushViewController(taskFormVC, animated: true)}
And that’s it. You can test out the form and add new tasks to the
list.
Summary
The code for this chapter is available in the Chapter22 folder of
the source code.

--- Page 354 ---
In this chapter, you learned how to programmatically build a
UIKit-based application, removing Storyboards from the
development process.
You explored how to set the root view controller from the
SceneDelegate class, how to create interface elements like
buttons and labels within view controllers, and how to apply
constraints when needed.
You also explored the delegate pattern, using it to add new task
data to the tasks array.
In the next chapter, we’ll move on to saving data persistently
with Core Data, the database framework provided for UIKit,
and finish the app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 355 ---
CHAPTER 23: GETTING STARTED
WITH CORE DATA
The Core Data framework is used in UIKit apps to save data to
an SQLite database, similar to how SwiftData works.
In fact, SwiftData is just a Swift-based extension of Core Data,
designed so that Swift developers can use Core Data in a
simpler way.
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to set up and use Core Data in a
UIKit-based app.
We’ll walk through creating a data model, defining entities,
initializing the persistent container, and then use the container
for create, read, update, and delete operations in the app.
Creating Core Data Model, Entity, and
Container
First, you need to create a data model file to define the
structure of your data as objects. This is similar to how you
create a @Model class in SwiftUI.

--- Page 356 ---
Press Command + N to open the new file from the template menu,
and search for the Data Model template as shown below:
Click on the template, then click Next to enter the details for
this file. Using the default 'Model' name is okay.
Select the model file and create a new entity object. Name the
entity as 'Task Entity' and set the Codegen option to
Manual/None:

--- Page 357 ---
After that, add the two attributes required in this entity: title
as String and isCompleted as Boolean.
The next step is to add code for accessing the data as objects.
This is done by creating a class that extends the NSManagedObject
class, which represents the data stored in the database
Select Editor > Create NSManagedObject Subclass…  to create
the TaskEntity class. You can click Next for the next several
options as there’s only one entity available.
Xcode will generate two files in the project:
TaskEntity+CoreDataClass and TaskEntity+CoreDataProperties
files.
In the TaskEntity+CoreDataClass file, you can see the subclass of
NSManagedObject generated as follows:
import Foundation
import CoreData
@objc(TaskEntity)
public class TaskEntity: NSManagedObject {

--- Page 358 ---
}
On the other hand, the TaskEntity+CoreDataProperties file stores
the fetchRequest() function for retrieving the data and
properties of the entity:
extension TaskEntity {
    @nonobjc public class func fetchRequest() -> NSFetchRequest<TaskEntity> {        return NSFetchRequest<TaskEntity>(entityName: "TaskEntity")    }
    @NSManaged public var isCompleted: Bool    @NSManaged public var title: String?
}
extension TaskEntity : Identifiable {
}
This generated code allows you to create an instance of the
TaskEntity class and interact with its properties.
However, you still need to create a container that manages the
reading and writing of the data to the database, just like
SwiftData.
In your AppDelegate file, add the following code:
import CoreData
// Put this inside the class// MARK: - Core Data Stacklazy var persistentContainer: NSPersistentContainer = {    let container = NSPersistentContainer(name: "Model")    container.loadPersistentStores(completionHandler: { (storeDescription,error) in        if let error = error as NSError? {            fatalError("Unresolved error \(error), \(error.userInfo)")        }    })

--- Page 359 ---
    return container}()
The persistentContainer computer property simply creates an
instance of NSPersistentContainer class. Here, you need to pass
the name of the data model file, which is 'Model' in this case.
After creating the container, the
container.loadPersistentStores() is called to load the persistent
stores used as the database and then return it. There will be a
fatalError() when the loading process fails.
With the data object and container ready, it’s time to use them
in the controllers.
Updating TaskFormViewController
Let’s update the TaskFormViewController to save the submitted
task to the database.
You need to import CoreData and get the view context through
AppDelegate instance. Also, change the delegate protocol as
follows:
import CoreData
protocol TaskFormDelegate: AnyObject {    func taskDataChanged()}
class TaskFormViewController: UIViewController {
    let context = (UIApplication.shared.delegate as!AppDelegate).persistentContainer.viewContext    // ...}

--- Page 360 ---
The viewContext contains a reference to the
NSManagedObjectContext, so it’s actually the model context
instead of the view.
Next, create an extension and write the functions to save and
update data as follows:
extension TaskFormViewController {
    func createTask(taskTitle: String, taskStatus: Bool) {
        let newTask = TaskEntity(context: context)
        newTask.title = taskTitle
        newTask.isCompleted = taskStatus
        do {
            try context.save()
        } catch {
            print("Failed to save task: \(error)")
        }    }
    func updateTask(taskToUpdate: TaskEntity, taskTitle: String, taskStatus:
Bool){
        taskToUpdate.title = taskTitle
        taskToUpdate.isCompleted = taskStatus
        do {
            try context.save()
        } catch {
            print("Failed to update task: \(error)")
        }    }}
The createTask function creates a new TaskEntity object, and
then saves it using the context.save() method.
The updateTask function changes the taskToUpdate properties,
then saves it as well. When using Core Data, you always need to
call context.save() manually (unlike SwiftData where changes
are automatically saved)

--- Page 361 ---
Now you can call the createTask function inside didTapSaveTask
as shown below:
if validate {
    let title = taskTitleTextField.text ?? ""
    let isCompleted = taskStatusSwitch.isOn
    createTask(taskTitle: title, taskStatus: isCompleted)
    delegate?.taskDataChanged()
    navigationController?.popViewController(animated: true)
}
After calling the createTask function, call the delegate method
and pop the controller as before.
Now you need to update TaskListViewController to make the
delegate function work.
Updating TaskListViewController
Import the CoreData library, get the context, and change the
tasks array type as follows:
import CoreData
class TaskListViewController: UIViewController, UITableViewDelegate,UITableViewDataSource {    let context = (UIApplication.shared.delegate as!AppDelegate).persistentContainer.viewContext
    var tasks = [TaskEntity]()    // ...}
Next, create an extension to fetch and delete task data. Also
change the TaskFormDelegate content as follows:
extension TaskListViewController: TaskFormDelegate {
    func taskDataChanged() {
        fetchTasks()
    }

--- Page 362 ---
}
extension TaskListViewController {
    func fetchTasks() {
        do {
            tasks = try context.fetch(TaskEntity.fetchRequest())
            DispatchQueue.main.async {
                self.taskListTableView.reloadData()
            }
        } catch {
            print("Failed to fetch tasks: \(error)")
        }    }
    func deleteTask(taskToDelete: TaskEntity) {
        context.delete(taskToDelete)
        do {
            try context.save()
        } catch {
            print("Failed to delete task: \(error)")
        }    }
}
The fetchTasks() function simply calls the
TaskEntity.fetchRequest() method generated by Xcode earlier.
The DispatchQueue.main.async is used to run
taskListTableView.reloadData() on the main thread.
Finally, you need to call the fetchTasks() function in
viewDidLoad() method to get the data when the view first loaded
on the screen:
taskListTableView.delegate = self
taskListTableView.dataSource = self
fetchTasks()
If you run the app now, you should be able to save task data to
the database.

--- Page 363 ---
Swipe Actions For Editing and Deleting a Task
The swipe actions for programmatic UI are very similar to the
Storyboard UI.
Here’s the trailing swipe action code for the delete action:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,
trailingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->
UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {
    let deleteAction = UIContextualAction(style: .destructive, title:
"Delete") {
        (_, _, completionHandler) in
        let taskToDelete = self.tasks[indexPath.row]
        self.tasks.remove(at: indexPath.row)
        tableView.deleteRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic)
        self.deleteTask(taskToDelete: taskToDelete)
        completionHandler(true)
    }
    let swipeConfiguration = UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions:
[deleteAction])
    swipeConfiguration.performsFirstActionWithFullSwipe = false
    return swipeConfiguration
}
The only difference here is that you need to call the
deleteTask() function to remove task from the database.
And here’s the leading swipe action for the edit action:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView,leadingSwipeActionsConfigurationForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->UISwipeActionsConfiguration? {    let editAction = UIContextualAction(style: .normal, title: "Edit") {        (action, sourceView, completionHandler) in        let taskFormVC = TaskFormViewController()        taskFormVC.title = "Update Task"        taskFormVC.taskToEdit = self.tasks[indexPath.row]        taskFormVC.delegate = self
        self.navigationController?.pushViewController(taskFormVC, animated:true)

--- Page 364 ---
        completionHandler(true)    }
    editAction.backgroundColor = UIColor(.green)
    let swipeConfiguration = UISwipeActionsConfiguration(actions: [editAction])    swipeConfiguration.performsFirstActionWithFullSwipe = false
    return swipeConfiguration}
In the code above, an instance of TaskFormViewController is
created and configured for updating the task procedure.
Now you need to adjust the TaskFormViewController for editing a
task. Add the taskToEdit property and update the viewDidLoad()
and didTapSaveTask() functions:
class TaskFormViewController: UIViewController {
    var taskToEdit: TaskEntity?
    override func viewDidLoad() {
        super.viewDidLoad()
        title = "Task Form"
        view.backgroundColor = .white
        // Populate fields when taskToEdit is not nil
        if let task = taskToEdit {
            taskTitleTextField.text = task.title
            taskStatusSwitch.isOn = task.isCompleted
        }
        // ...
    }
    @objc func didTapSaveTask() {
        if validate {
            let title = taskTitleTextField.text ?? ""
            let isCompleted = taskStatusSwitch.isOn
            // Update task if taskToEdit is not nil
            if let task = taskToEdit {
                updateTask(taskToUpdate: task, taskTitle: title, taskStatus:
isCompleted)
            } else {

--- Page 365 ---
                createTask(taskTitle: title, taskStatus: isCompleted)
            }
            delegate?.taskDataChanged()
            navigationController?.popViewController(animated: true)
        } else {
            // ...
        }    }}
With that, the delete and edit swipe actions are completed.
Creating the SingleTaskCell Class
The only thing left is to create the SingleTaskCell, so let’s create
it:
class SingleTaskCell: UITableViewCell {
    // Label and button:    var taskTitle = UILabel()    var taskStatus =  UIButton()
    // Fill the task data    var task: TaskEntity? {        didSet {            guard let task = task else { return }            taskTitle.text = task.title            let imageName = task.isCompleted ? "checkmark.circle.fill" :"circle"            taskStatus.setImage(UIImage(systemName: imageName), for: .normal)        }    }
    // Toggle completion function
    var toggleCompletion: (() -> Void)?}
In the code above, we create a SingleTaskCell class with the
properties required by the cell view.
Next, override the init() function as follows:

--- Page 366 ---
override init(style: UITableViewCell.CellStyle, reuseIdentifier: String?) {    super.init(style: style, reuseIdentifier: reuseIdentifier)
    taskStatus.addTarget(self, action: #selector(didTaptaskStatus), for:.touchUpInside)
    contentView.addSubview(taskTitle)    contentView.addSubview(taskStatus)
    setupConstraints()}
required init?(coder: NSCoder) {    fatalError("init(coder:) has not been implemented")}
The init function is similar to the viewDidLoad function, but for
the UITableViewCell
Finally, add the didTaptaskStatus() and setupConstraints()
functions:
@objc func didTaptaskStatus() {
    toggleCompletion?()
}
func setupConstraints() {
    taskTitle.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
    taskStatus.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
    NSLayoutConstraint.activate([
        taskTitle.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: leadingAnchor, constant:
10),
        taskTitle.centerYAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerYAnchor),
        taskStatus.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: trailingAnchor,
constant: -10),
        taskStatus.centerYAnchor.constraint(equalTo: centerYAnchor)
    ])}
The SingleTaskCell is now completed. The only thing left is to
use this view cell in the table view.

--- Page 367 ---
Open the TaskListViewController class and perform the
following changes:
let taskListTableView: UITableView = {    let table = UITableView()    table.register(SingleTaskCell.self, forCellReuseIdentifier: "taskCell")    return table}()
The UITableView now registers the SingleTaskCell instead of
UITableViewCell.
You also need to adjust the cellForRowAt method:
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) ->
UITableViewCell {
    let cell = taskListTableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:
"taskCell", for: indexPath) as! SingleTaskCell
    let task = tasks[indexPath.row]
    cell.task = task
    cell.toggleCompletion = { [weak self] in
        self?.tasks[indexPath.row].isCompleted.toggle()
        tableView.reloadRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic)
        do {
            try self?.context.save()
        } catch {
            print("Failed to update task: \(error)")
        }    }
    return cell
}
Here, the cell is marked as an instance of SingleTaskCell with
the as! SingleTaskCell syntax.
The task property of the cell is assigned, then the
toggleCompletion property performs the status toggle and saves
it to the database.

--- Page 368 ---
With that, the app is now completed. You have successfully
created a fully functional app using programmatic UI.
Summary
The code for this chapter can be found in the Chapter23 folder
of the source code.
In this chapter, we explored how to integrate Core Data into a
UIKit-based app that uses a programmatic UI approach, and
then finish the app features.
While programmatic UI offers simplicity compared to
Storyboard-based UI, it has one notable drawback: you can’t
visually see the view as you build it.
This is in contrast to SwiftUI, which not only allows you to
declare views programmatically but also provides a live
preview of the rendered view.
SwiftUI essentially combines the best of both worlds —-
programmatic UI and Storyboard — by offering the flexibility of
code-based UI development alongside the convenience of a
visual preview.
Moreover, Apple continues to expand SwiftUI’s capabilities with
frequent updates. This is why developing apps using SwiftUI is
recommended over UIKit, whether you use Storyboard or not.
If you want me to explore how to create a more complex app
using UIKit, let me know by sending an email to
nathan@codewithnathan.com and I will add more chapters to
this section for you and other readers.

--- Page 369 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 370 ---
WRAPPING UP
Congratulations on finishing this book! We’ve gone through
many concepts and topics together to help you learn how to
develop a flexible and intuitive iOS application using Swift,
SwiftUI, SwiftData, and other frameworks.
You also learned how to publish the application on the App
Store, making it accessible for others to download and use.
Additionally, you explored legacy iOS development techniques,
including UIKit, Storyboard, and Core Data.
I hope you enjoyed learning and exploring iOS app
development with this book as much as I enjoyed writing it.
I’d like to ask you for a small favor.
If you enjoyed the book, I’d be very grateful if you would leave
an honest review on Amazon (I read all reviews coming my
way)
Every single review counts, and your support does make a big
difference.
Thanks again for your kind support!

--- Page 371 ---
Until next time,
Nathan
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 372 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Nathan Sebhastian is a senior software developer with 8+ years
of experience in developing web and mobile applications.
He is passionate about making technology education accessible
for everyone and has taught online since 2018.
Nathan also has a 7-day free email course on Mindset of The
Successful Software Developer which you can get at
https://g.codewithnathan.com/mindset
Each email unveils a slice of wisdom that Nathan got after
working as a web developer and programmer for 8+ years in
the tech industry, from startups to mega-corporations. It offers
a fresh perspective on what it means to be a happy and
successful software developer.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 373 ---
iOS App Development for Beginners
A Step-By-Step Practical Guide to Programming iOS Applications
With Swift, SwiftUI, SwiftData, and Xcode
By Nathan Sebhastian
https://codewithnathan.com
Copyright © 2024 By Nathan Sebhastian
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
No part of this book may be reproduced, or stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without
express written permission from the author.
OceanofPDF.com