--- Page 2 ---
Learning Unreal® Engine iOS 
Game Development
Create exciting iOS games with the power of the  
new Unreal® Engine 4 subsystems
Muhammad A.Moniem
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

--- Page 3 ---
Learning Unreal® Engine iOS Game Development
Copyright © 2015 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
Unreal, Unreal Engine, the circle-U logo and the Powered by Unreal Engine logo  
are trademarks or registered trademarks of Epic Games, Inc. in the United States  
and elsewhere.
First published: February 2015
Production reference: 1230215
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78439-771-5
www.packtpub.com

--- Page 4 ---
Credits
Author
Muhammad A.Moniem
Reviewers
Alankar Pradhan
Mohit Ramani
Sahil Ramani
Sourav Tosh
Commissioning Editor
Edward Bowkett
Acquisition Editors
Rebecca Youé
Richard Gall
Content Development Editor
Arwa Manasawala
Technical Editor
Faisal Siddiqui
Copy Editors
Pranjali Chury
Brinda S. Madhu
Project Coordinator
Purav Motiwalla
Proofreaders
Simran Bhogal
Stephen Copestake
Paul Hindle
Bernadette Watkins
Indexer
Mariammal Chettiyar
Production Coordinator
Manu Joseph
Cover Work
Manu Joseph

--- Page 5 ---
About the Author
Muhammad A.Moniem started in the industry at a very early age. He taught 
himself everything related to the game development process even before he joined 
college. After being a software engineer, he started to teach himself the art of game 
design and game art techniques. As a self-taught person, he was able to find his way 
into the industry very easily, which led him to be hired for big, medium, and small 
companies, titles, and teams. Throughout his career, he was able to contribute as a 
full-time or part-time employee, or freelancer on games for a wide range of platforms, 
including Windows, Mac, iOS, Android, PS4, XBOXOne, and OUYA; he has also 
worked with technologies such as VR, AR, or Kinect. Finally, he was able to establish 
his own one-person game company/team as a part-time independent developer. 
Lots of his indie games got recognition or have been finalists in international indie 
game events such as IGF, Indie Showcase, IGC, and Tokyo Game Show. He has also 
designed an amazing website, 
www.mamoniem.com.

--- Page 6 ---
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all those who helped me make this book possible. A special 
mention to all the team members at Epic Games for their hard work on Unreal® 
Engine and for the great decision of making the engine available to everyone by 
sharing the source code. Without their hard work and tough decisions, this book 
would not exist. I would like to thank them for their support along the way since 
I started using Unreal
®, and all the people I knew at Epic were supportive and 
interested in my activities with the engine.
I would like to thank all the people at Packt Publishing who worked on this book. 
They helped me a lot and were patient when I got out of my schedule because of 
my personal obligations. A special thanks to the technical reviewers; they constantly 
checked my errors and omissions. This book has become better because of them; 
thanks to all their hard work. Richard, Arwa, Rebecca, and Faisal; thank you for 
bringing me on board at Packt and helping me put the book together.
Last but not least, I want to express my pleasure of having Lamiaa, Yusuf, and 
Mariam in my life. You are all my gifts. You are a very supportive family; thanks  
for giving me the best environment to write this book, and thanks for believing  
in all my projects. Father and mother, thanks for teaching me how to learn on my 
own; it helped me a lot to learn and pass on the knowledge.

--- Page 7 ---
About the Reviewers
Alankar Pradhan is from Mumbai, Maharashtra, and did his schooling at I.E.S.'s 
CPV high school. He is an ambitious person who loves interacting with new people, 
traveling, spending leisure time with friends, or playing games over PC and mobile. 
Games have always been a passion in his life. More than just playing games, how 
things work was his main curiosity. Hence, he decided to pursue his career in the 
same field. He graduated with a BSc in software development from Sheffield Hallam 
University, UK. He did his master's in game programming (BAC+5 equivalent) 
from DSK Supinfogame, where he undertook industry-oriented projects to increase 
his skill set and gave his best to do so. He worked as a game programming intern 
at The Walt Disney Company India Pvt Ltd. During his internship, he worked on 
a live project called Hitout Heroes, where he was responsible for the integration of 
small gameplay modules and the social integration of Facebook into the game. Later, 
the whole UI implementation, working, flow, and mechanism was managed solely 
by him. At the end, he was responsible for bug solving and memory management. 
His name was added in the credits due to the noticeable work accomplished. He 
also interned as a game programmer with DSK Green Ice Games and is currently 
working as a video game programmer on a game targeted at PCs and consoles.
He has worked on many small projects in teams as well as individually, sharpening 
his own skills in various languages, such as C#, C++, Java, Unreal
® Script, Python, 
Lua, Groovy/Grails, and HTML5/CSS. He is familiar with engines such as Unity3D, 
Unreal
® Development Kit, Visual Studio and SDKs such as NetBeans, Eclipse, and 
Wintermute. In 2013, his dissertation on Comparison between Python and Lua in Gaming 
Industry got published as a book. He has previously worked as a technical reviewer 
on a book called Creating E-Learning Games With Unity by Packt Publishing.

--- Page 8 ---
Besides this, he even likes to read, listen to music, and write poems and short stories 
at times. He has his own website (http://alan.poetrycraze.com) where he posts 
his poems and has also published a book called The Art Of Lost Words, CreateSpace 
Independent Publishing Platform, which is available at www.amazon.com.
E-mail: alankar.pradhan@gmail.com
Portfolio site: alankarpradhan.wix.com/my-portfolio
Social: www.facebook.com/alankar.pradhan
We are so often caught up in our aim that we forget to appreciate the 
journey; especially the people we meet on the way. Appreciation is a 
wonderful feeling; its way better if we don't overlook it. I hereby like 
to take this opportunity to acknowledge the people who directed me 
and inspired me in this initiative.
I would like to express my heartily thanks to my parents, who instilled 
me and always believed in me. I am also thankful to my friends for 
their constant support and encouraging words that helped me to reach 
this level.
Last but not the least, I would like to thank all the people who are 
directly or indirectly involved in this and helped me.

--- Page 9 ---
Mohit Ramani is an engineering graduate from Bharati Vidyapeeth, Pune.  
He graduated in 2010 and went on to work with some of the major game 
development companies before starting his own gaming venture in 2013.  
He has hands-on experience in development of games on Android, iOS, Web, 
Windows, and consoles and has more than 25 titles under his belt, including  
major titles on PS2, PSP, PS3, and PC.
He now runs his own gaming company in New Delhi—Digital Agents Interactive 
Private Limited—where they develop games and interactive solutions for mobiles, 
PCs, and consoles. They also use technologies such as augmented and virtual reality 
in their projects to make them more immersive and engaging. Their aim is to be the 
most innovative gaming company in India.
Personal website: 
www.mohitramani.com
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/mohit.ramani
Company website: www.digitalagents.in
I would like to thank my parents, Hardayal Kewal Ramani and 
Madhu Kewal Ramani, my two brothers, Vishal Ramani and Mukul 
Ramani, my cousin and partner, Dalip Kewalramani, my friends, and 
last but not least, my team at Digital Agents Interactive without whose 
support, it would not have been possible for me to reach this stage and 
review this book. I thank them all for being there when I needed them.
Sahil Ramani is an avid graphics and game developer with a master's degree in 
game development and has experience working in both animation and game studios. 
His varied experience includes building game engines, tools, and frameworks for 
personal and professional gain. Among the free game engines available online, he 
has experience working with Unity 3D, Unreal
® Engine, and OGRE in order to build 
games for Windows, Linux, and MacOSX, apart from iOS and Android.
I would like to thank Packt Publishing for giving me the opportunity 
to review this book on such a niche topic, and I wish the author the 
best in his future endeavors.

--- Page 10 ---
Sourav Tosh is a software engineer currently working for Electronic Arts. Driven 
by an early interest in games and programming, he would often write small games 
and demos and show them to his friends and family. He has worked on titles for PC, 
consoles, and mobile devices. He has previously worked for Lakshya Digital and 
Trine Games Studio. He has worked with a number of commercial game engines, 
including Infernal Engine, Esenthel Engine, Unreal
® Engine, and Unity3D Engine. 
While not reading games programming books or making games, he enjoys playing 
video games and board games.
I am particularly grateful to my teacher, Amal Kanti Seal,  
without whom, I probably would not have developed an interest 
in programming in the first place, and my closest friend, Anindya 
Raychaudhuri, who spends hours and hours working with me on 
games and keeping the dream alive. It was, in fact, his computer 
where I discovered the magical world of video games. A heartfelt 
thanks also goes to my love, Sampita Tosh, who always believed  
in me and encouraged me to go forward. Without her sacrifices,  
this would never have been possible.

--- Page 11 ---
www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com 
and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in 
touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles,  
sign up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers  
on Packt books and eBooks.
TM
https://www2.packtpub.com/books/subscription/packtlib
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
• Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
• On demand and accessible via a web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view 9 entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.

--- Page 12 ---
Table of Contents
Preface 1
Chapter 1: Prepare to Make Unreal Games with  
Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up 7
Getting ready and setting up 8
What if I don't have a Mac OS computer? 8
Getting and building the engine 9
Direct download 9
GitHub version 11
Preparing the other required tools 15
XCode 5.1 or higher 15
3D and 2D applications 15
The application loader 16
iTunes and iTools 16
Preparing a game profile on the App Store 16
Generating certificates 18
Generating an App ID 20
Adding devices 20
Generating provisioning profiles 21
Summary 23
Chapter 2: Methods and Tools to Create Your Games 25
Blueprints inside Unreal® Engine 25
Different types of blueprints 27
The need for blueprints 28
What is a node? 29
The iOS/Mobile-only nodes 30

--- Page 13 ---
Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Blueprints – tips and tricks 37
The iOS project pipeline 39
Building the game's provisioning profiles 39
Setting up the game's provisioning profile 39
Creating a new project 40
Editing the project settings 41
Editing the *.plist file 45
Building a project 45
Launching 46
Packaging 46
Summary 48
Chapter 3: Creating a Brick Breaking Game 49
The project structure 50
Building the blueprints 50
Gameplay mechanics 51
Starting a new level 51
Building the game mode 52
Building the game's main material 53
Building the blueprints and components 55
Building the layout blueprint 56
Building the ball blueprint 60
Building the platform blueprint 63
Building the graphs and logic 63
The layout blueprint graph 66
The Ball blueprint graph 70
The platform blueprint graph 72
Summary 76
Chapter 4: Advanced Game Content Generation with  
a Fruit Chopper Game 77
The project structure 78
Importing the assets 78
An overview of blueprints 80
The gameplay mechanic 81
The game levels 82
Building the particles 82
Building the material 82
Building the particle system 84
Building the blueprints 85
Player controller 85
Fruits blueprints 86

--- Page 14 ---
Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Bomb blueprint 90
Win/lose blueprints 91
LevelLogic fruitsGame blueprint 92
Summary 100
Chapter 5: Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game 101
The project structure 102
Importing the assets 102
Building the animated sprites 103
An overview of blueprints 105
The gameplay mechanics 105
Building the blueprints 106
Building the logic 110
Pushing the boundaries 116
Summary 117
Chapter 6: Designing an Advanced Game 119
The project structure 119
Importing the assets 120
Building the animated sprites 120
The blueprints 121
The gameplay mechanic 122
Building the blueprints 123
gameInputs 123
uiText 126
mainChar 126
enemyRed 128
crateBox 130
bullet 130
shootingFGameMode 131
spawnPoint 131
Building the logic 131
uiText 132
enemyRed 133
spawnPoint 134
bullet 136
mainChar 137
Using 2D colliders 140
Pushing the boundaries 142
Summary 142

--- Page 15 ---
Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Chapter 7: Monetizing Your Game 143
iAd support 144
iTunes Connect 145
Adding in-app purchases 148
Adding leaderboards 149
Adding achievements 151
Summary 153
Chapter 8: iOS Debugging and Optimization 155
Blueprints Live view 155
Printing messages 157
Breakpoints 159
XCode tools 164
Debug Navigator 165
Capturing frames 168
Instruments 169
Performance optimization 170
Minimizing the game size 170
Summary 171
Chapter 9: Publishing 173
Packaging the project 173
Editing the game profile 179
Uploading and submiting for review 180
Summary 186
Appendix: Nodes Database 187
Index 191

--- Page 16 ---
Preface
This book is meant to help you going into the process of creating an iOS game from 
scratch using one of the best and oldest engines in the industry—Unreal ® Engine 4.
Although the engine was made from the beginning to make AAA games for PC and 
console, it has recently acquired the market of casual and mobile games with lots of 
power and creative tools.
During the course of this book, we will go in depth into how to make several casual 
game types that look a lot like the top selling and profiting games on the App Store.
What will be covered?
Chapter 1, Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting 
Up, will take you through the process of preparing your environment to develop 
an iOS game using Unreal
® Engine 4. At the end of the day, making an iOS game is 
completely different from making any other game, even if from other mobile devices.
Chapter 2, Methods and Tools to Create Your Games, discusses the different ways in 
which we can make a game using Epic's technology, what is the best, and why.
Chapter 3, Creating a Brick Breaking Game, contains the first game to be made in this 
book. Physics is one of the most important topics in any game engine, so in this 
chapter, will be making a game based on physics to understand how it works in 
Unreal
® Engine.
Chapter 4, Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game, is the second 
game project in this book and will feature how to make a simple 3D game, which has 
more animations, effects, and complex swipe inputs.

--- Page 17 ---
Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 5, Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game, admits that the most famous 
genre in mobile games in the last few years was the endless runner games. So, we 
will be taking the ride of making a runner game with a randomly generated level.
Chapter 6, Designing an Advanced Game, tells you what a game is without enemies. 
All the past examples were based on scoring with some obstacles, but let's add some 
enemies in that chapter to interact with, in a simple touch-screen-friendly platformer 
game.
Chapter 7, Monetizing Your Game, will cover the easiest way to get profit from your 
free games. There are a few techniques that can be added to any mobile/iOS game  
to make it bring you money.
Chapter 8, iOS Debugging and Optimization, helps you understand why debugging 
is considered as a top priority when it comes to mobile devices, the pros of finding 
and fixing bugs, various debugging tools and techniques, and how to optimize 
performance.
Chapter 9, Publishing, will take you through the process of building and submitting 
the game to the store review because a game is not a game without an audience.  
This chapter is the final destination for any game release.
Appendix, Nodes Database, gives you a full database with explanation for each node 
we have used during the process of making all the four game examples. It will be 
helpful for you to start improvising and making your own unique games.
Who this book is for
If you are looking for a book that teaches you the game design of a top selling  
iOS game, then this is the wrong book to read. If you are looking for a book to  
help you to prepare you art assets and make animations for your games, again  
this is the wrong book.
This book is mainly focused on the implantation of any art asset that you will 
use into the engine and how you can start putting everything together; building 
blueprints; gameplay logic; adding lots of fun, eye candy, and ear candy to the 
games; and building those games for testing and publishing on the App Store.
If you are a programmer who wants to switch to Unreal
® Engine, or a programmer 
who is willing to learn the visual scripting, or even just a guy who wants to start 
making games; this is the correct place for you. The book is friendly with everyone  
who wants to make iOS games using Epic's technology regardless of their background.

--- Page 18 ---
Preface
[ 3 ]
What you need for this book
You will need to have a Mac computer (windows PC is fine if you cannot provide 
a Mac). Also, you will need to have Unreal® Engine (I used 4.3.0 while writing the 
book), you will need to have XCode (5.1 or later, it depends on your Engine version), 
And finally a big cup of tea…
Also you need to have a base knowledge of the Mac OSX, as there will be some steps 
related to the OS itself, so you need to be a bit familiar with it.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"We can include other contexts through the use of the 
include directive."
A block of code is set as follows:
[default]
exten => s,1,Dial(Zap/1|30)
exten => s,2,Voicemail(u100)
exten => s,102,Voicemail(b100)
exten => i,1,Voicemail(s0)
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the 
relevant lines or items are set in bold:
[default]
exten => s,1,Dial(Zap/1|30)
exten => s,2,Voicemail(u100)
exten => s,102,Voicemail(b100)
exten => i,1,Voicemail(s0)
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
# cp /usr/src/asterisk-addons/configs/cdr_mysql.conf.sample
     /etc/asterisk/cdr_mysql.conf
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on  
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: 
"clicking on the Next button moves you to the next screen."

--- Page 19 ---
Preface
[ 4 ]
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it  
helps us develop titles that you will really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail 
feedback@packtpub.com, and mention 
the book's title in the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide at 
www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files from your account at http://www.
packtpub.com for all the Packt Publishing books you have purchased. If you 
purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/ 
support and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.

--- Page 20 ---
Preface
[ 5 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting 
http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form 
link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website or added 
to any list of existing errata under the Errata section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to 
https://www.packtpub.com/books/
content/support and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required 
information will appear under the Errata section.
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all 
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at 
copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at 
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

--- Page 22 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal 
Games with Unreal® Engine – 
Installing and Setting Up
Making games was always a time consuming process that involved many people 
who had to keep focusing on building a game engine for at least a year before the 
game itself, and these custom engines would usually not be used with any other game 
afterwards. However, with the huge evolution of technology, we started to see lots of 
new handy engines that allow you to build several game types and save you the time 
of writing an engine from scratch, giving you a chance to focus on the game itself.
A long time ago, each platform was totally independent, and you were required 
to use a tool tied to the platform to create your own apps and games. Nowadays, 
however, with the evolution toward multi-platform development, making games  
for a platform using another one has become a lot easier—more than easy, in fact!
When it comes to making iOS games, there are a number of factors we have to keep 
in mind. Unreal Engine 4.0 supports the development of iOS games on Windows. 
However, later versions (4.3 onwards) support the ability to make, build, and test iOS 
games from within a Windows-based machine and then import them to your iOS 
device via some special tools that have been developed by Epic. This gives us a wide 
range of available scenarios when it comes to making/building iOS games using UE4.
Unreal Engine has been on the market for almost 20 years, and the leading AAA 
companies have used it to make tons and tons of games for a wide range of platforms. 
However, recently Epic has moved it to another step, where it is open for everyone in 
the world with a low price and more platform support. This gives lots of people the 
chance to start using this technology to achieve what was initially exclusive for AAA 
companies only.

--- Page 23 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 8 ]
In this chapter, we'll cover the following topics:
• Getting and installing the engine
• Building the source code on Mac
• The difference between the several engine copies
• Tools required for iOS game development
• Creating game profiles on the Apple Developers Portal
Getting ready and setting up
Despite the relative openness of UE4, I would recommend you use a Mac OS X 
computer for developing iOS games using Unreal (or any other engine for that 
matter). It's important as it gives you direct access to XCode, which you will  
need to use to do the following:
• Debugging your game using its console
• Analyzing the game's performance using its tools (instruments)
• Adding a third party's libraries to the XCode project
• Adding platform-specific code to the game's XCode project
What if I don't have a Mac OS computer?
If you don't have an iMac, Mac Pro, or MacBook Air, there are still other options that 
you can choose:
• Purchase a Mac mini, which is very cheap and can get the job done.  
With Epic's new system, you can work and make all your games in a 
Windows-based computer and then move them to your Mac to build  
and test with more efficient building tools.
• Install a virtual machine on your Windows-based PC using applications  
like Virtual Box (this saved me one day when I was not able to get a Mac).  
In this case, you will have a dual OS on one device.
Use Virtual Box to turn your PC into a fully functional Mac, but it should  
be done on your own guarantee!
• Your last choice is to run a normal Windows OS PC; you will be able to 
follow along 100 percent with this book, except only one part where we 
will build the engine. This should also be a straightforward process on the 
Windows platform. However, you can save your time and just download  
the prebuilt version directly from Epic's website.

--- Page 24 ---
Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Getting and building the engine
The first step is to get the engine running. Using Unreal Engine to build iOS games 
is a little different than using any other tool or engine out there, as Epic took a brave 
and awesome step by releasing its entire engine source code to its subscribers.  
We will see two different ways to get the engine running.
Direct download
Downloading UE4 directly will ensure that you have an already compiled version  
of the engine. All that you have to do is just start using it. You can get it by following 
these steps:
1. Access the engine home page.
2. Press the Get Unreal button and start filling in all your information  
to make an account with Epic games. Also, you will need to read the  
engine license and accept it if it works fine with you.
3. After confirming your e-mail and getting your account running,  
your dashboard will look different. You will see a confirmation of  
the successful subscription billing.


--- Page 25 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 10 ]
4. Then, you will see the other options to download the engine. In the case 
of direct download, you have to pick the launcher OS version you want: 
Windows or Mac. In my case, I've picked the Mac version (keep in mind  
that it will download a launcher, which is approximately 50 MB only).
5. When you run the launcher, you will find many useful links to the forums, 
answer hubs, and marketplace where you can find free projects among  
other things.
You can go to the library and select an engine version (the latest should be 
the best; I'm running 4.3 while writing this book, as it is the latest one and 
was just released a few days ago) and start installing it. After you finish, 
you will see a new section called Engine Slots, which holds all the engine 
versions you are running via the launcher.
6. Finally, you can run the engine!

--- Page 26 ---
Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
GitHub version
The GitHub version is not just a precompiled copy of the engine; it contains the full 
C++ source code of the engine, which means if you are a ninja coder and you want to 
add new features or fix the engine bugs and improve it, this is the best way to get your 
copy. Also, if you are a beginner in the engine world or a student who wants to learn 
more about the engine constructions, your best bet is to get the GitHub version:
1. After the first three steps in the previous method (opening the engine page 
and registering an account with Epic), instead of selecting to download a 
launcher, you will need to access the GitHub version to get the full source 
code of the engine.
2. Follow the link in the GitHub instructions to access the repository.


--- Page 27 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 12 ]
3. To be able to access Epic's repository of the engine in GitHub (which is  
a private repository), you will need to list your GitHub account name  
(make a new one if you don't have one already) in your account settings.  
This should be enough to connect your GitHub account with Epic's GitHub 
group. If you access your GitHub account, you should now find Epic listed  
in your organizations list.
4. From the available branches, you can select the version of the engine you 
want to download, or you can directly access all the release versions from  
the release tag at the top of the page:
5. Now, you need to download the files associated with the engine version you 
chose. Ensure that you download only 4 out of 5: Optional, Required_1of2, 
Required_2of2, and Source code(zip).

--- Page 28 ---
Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
6. Now, as we have all the required files, we need to extract all of them while 
ensuring that the files are together in the same folder, without replacement  
of any of the folders. As all of the ZIP files contain the same folder names  
(as they are all related to one dependency), you might need to press Alt on 
your Mac while merging the files/folders and select Keep Newer to add 
them instead of replacing them.
7. After finishing the file merge process, you will end up with the final 
engine source code files, which is approximately 6.5 GB. All that you 
need now is to run the script that is responsible for generating the project 
files. If you are using a Mac, which is our case, then you need to run 
GenerateProjectFiles.command; otherwise you can run it's Windows 
equivalent, GenerateProjectFiles.bat.
8. This project file autogenerating process will hold for a few minutes and 
it will end up adding some files to your engine's folders and directories. 
However, the only one you can see and the only one you need right now  
to build the engine will be in the root directory: it will be an XCode project 
file named 
UE4.xcodeproj or a Visual Studio solution called UE4.sln  
on Windows.
9. Run this project in XCode 5.1 or later. Give it a while to index your project, 
which might take approximately 30 minutes or less, depending on your Mac 
speed. Don't be in a rush, as it might break everything if you start building to 
soon. You should wait till the activity viewer bar at the top of XCode finishes 
indexing and tells you that it is ready.

--- Page 29 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 14 ]
10. Now, it is time for the final step: building and running the engine. We just 
need to define what exactly we are going to build. In this case, we want 
to build an Unreal Engine Editor for Mac. So, we need to open the Set the 
active scheme menu from the top-left corner and select the UE4Editor – Mac 
scheme. Now, you can click on Build and run, and this will give you a debug 
build of the editor that could be a little slow and buggy. If you want a final 
build that is more optimized, efficient, and free from the debugging code, 
you could easily build using Product, Build For, and finally Profiling.


--- Page 30 ---
Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
After building, the Unreal Editor will run automatically. Whenever you want to 
run the Editor, you don't have to build it again; you just need to browse to the build 
location and open it. The location for Mac and Windows is as follows:
For Mac: 
UnrealEngine-4.3.0-release /Engine/Binaries/Mac/ UE4Editor-
4.3.0.app
For Windows: UnrealEngine-4.3.0-release /Engine/Binaries/Win64/ 
UE4Editor.exe
Keep in mind that the final *.app name might be different; it depends on the build 
type you made. Here, I made a debug engine build and my final engine application 
file was named Debug.app by default, which I then changed to UE4Editor-4.3.0. 
Feel free to change it; as long as you have different engine builds running at the  
same time, you will need to define them to avoid any confusion.
Preparing the other required tools
Making an iOS game with Unreal Engine doesn't mean that we will only be using 
Unreal Engine throughout the process. During the course of this book, you will  
need other tools and applications running too. Here are the other tools you will  
need and why.
XCode 5.1 or higher
As you saw in the previous steps, we used XCode to build our engine because it is 
the main IDE for Mac OS X. It is an essential tool and we will need it again anytime 
we want to rebuild the engine or write a C++ game using the generated project from 
Unreal Engine. As Epic has outlined, for Mac users, the minimum version to be used 
with Unreal Engine 4.x should be 5.1.
3D and 2D applications
As this book will take care of the process of making games using UE4, it is ultimately 
down to you whether you choose to use the assets provided with the book or your 
own that will fit your requirements. If you are going to build your own assets, I would 
recommend that you use Blender3D for the 3D assets or Inkscape for the 2D assets.  
I used both of these applications while I was building the examples presented in this 
book. Both are free/open source applications with high-end quality and tools.

--- Page 31 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 16 ]
The application loader
When we finish our game, we will need to submit it to Apple for review. The best 
and the only way to upload *.ipa files to Apple is using the Application Loader 
app. It is free and easily available. Later in Chapter 9, Publishing, you will learn how 
to use it during the submission process.
iTunes and iTools
If you are running on a Mac, then iTunes will be installed by default. However, if  
you are running on Windows, you will need to install it, as it is the best way to push  
an *.ipa installation file to your device to test it. If you cannot get hold of this, you  
can get iTools, which is very easy and straightforward to install and it runs on Mac  
and Windows. I used to use both applications all the time to push *.ipa builds to  
an authorized device outside XCode.E- iOS 6.0.
To be able to run Unreal Engine 4 games, you must have at least an iPhone 4 or iPad 2 
running iOS 6.0 or later.
Preparing a game profile on the App Store
As I already mentioned, making an iOS game is a little different than making any 
other mobile game. For iOS games in particular, there are many steps involved  
in the preproduction period; these steps should be done first on the App Store 
developer's portal to be able to run a test on a device.
To be able to run these steps, you must have an Apple iOS developer account; if 
you don't have one yet, then apply for one. It is a straightforward process, and like 
purchasing any other account, you will need to provide an Apple account number 
and a credit card or any other valid online payment method.
Registering for an iOS developer account should be processed quickly, so if you apply 
as an independent person, you might get the approval within two days. However, if 
you apply as a company, then it might take up to two weeks or a bit more.

--- Page 32 ---
Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Now, you have an Apple iOS account (your developer account permits you to 
develop or access the iOS dev center only; you will not be able to access Mac or  
Safari dev centers). We now have to perform several steps, which should be done 
in proper order, as some steps will be based on the previous steps. The good thing 
about the latest updates from Apple is that they made a new and better control 
panel, which organizes with the correct order. Previously, the control panel was  
a bit messy, which made it difficult to find what you want.


--- Page 33 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 18 ]
Generating certificates
Generating a certificate is a process that needs to be started in the development device 
(your Mac) and then completed in the Apple developer's portal.
First, you will need to open KeyChain Access, and through the drop-down menu of 
KeyChain Access, select Certificate Assistant. Finally, click on Request a Certificate 
from a Certified Authority.
From the Certificate Assistant window, fill the User Email Address field with your 
e-mail, insert a common name, and mark the Save to disk option to save the file to 
your disk. Click on Continue and save it to your desktop (or somewhere you can 
remember later).
This process will generate a file with a *.certSigningRequest extension.  
Go directly to the Apple developer's portal, access the iOS developers, and  
click on the Certificates section.
Click on Add, and you will be moved to a screen where you need to select a 
certificate type. Keep in mind that we will use the generated 
*.certSigningRequest 
extension twice. We will generate a development certificate to be used for the testing 
phase, and then we will make one for production, which will be used for the final 
build and store submission version of your games.

--- Page 34 ---
Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Here, select iOS App Development and click on Continue. In the following screen, 
you will find some information about how to make the *.certSigningRequest file, 
which we already made. Then, you can click on Continue and select the file from 
your desktop (or wherever you saved it).
Click on Generate, and this will provide you with a valid development certificate; 
download it.
Redo the same process, but this time, select App Store and Ad Hoc and use the  
same process to generate the production certificate and download it.
Now, as you have two certificates downloaded (files with the 
*.cer extension), 
double-click on each of them. This will run KeyChain Access for you and ask  
you whether you really want to install it. Do the process twice, as we will require  
one development certificate while building and testing and another one for the 
distribution build.
After installing both, you will find that they have a green icon next to each of them, 
and this tells you that both are valid.

--- Page 35 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 20 ]
Generating an App ID
Now, go back to the main panel in your iOS developer account screen, and from  
the section named Identifiers, choose the subsection App IDs and start adding a  
new App ID.
The process is very simple and it involves adding some inputs:
• App ID Description: You should describe your game/app within a small 
phrase. Normally, using your game name is enough to fill this input field.
• App ID Prefix: This will be auto added for you by Apple.
• App ID Suffix: This is the most important input (Bundle ID), and this is 
the one that will be used in your provisioning profile. Usually, you write 
the word com followed by . and then your company name followed by 
another . after which you finally write the game name, for example, com.
companyName.GameName.
• App Services: This allows you to select what exactly the game will be 
supporting. Keep in mind that you can come here again and edit the ID  
and regenerate it, so don't worry if you forget something.
Finally, click on Continue to finish the process of adding the App ID (Bundle ID).
Adding devices
As a part of the secure development environment that Apple provides to developers, 
you can define which devices are authorized to try the game/app during the 
development process. So, in case someone gets a development version of the game, 
he/she will not be able to run it on his/her device. Only the devices that are included 
in the provisioning profile (we will explain how to do this shortly) will be able to run 
the game build.
Adding a new device is a very simple process; you just hit the Add new device button 
in the Devices section on your left panel, and then provide the following details:
• Name: This is a name to identify whose device it is. Any name works fine.
• UDID: This is the unique identifier of the device. If you don't know how to 
get this, the easiest way is to simply connect your device to a Mac/PC and 
open iTunes. You will find the number directly on your device screen.
One last thing regarding the devices. Apple's developer portal allows you to add 
up to 100 devices in your devices list. These devices will not be per project but per 
account, meaning that you can have 100 devices as a company only; so, use them 
wisely if you are working in a huge team! Anyway, an iOS game in any size will  
not require such a massive team!

--- Page 36 ---
Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Generating provisioning profiles
This is our last and main destination in the process of preparing the game profile in 
Apple's developer portal, as all the previous steps were made to serve this process. 
All we need from the developer's portal are the provisioning profile files. With these 
files, we will be able to make a valid build (either development or release), but to have 
these valid files, we had to set up the certificate, App ID, and devices; you will see how 
useful and time saving it is to finish these three things beforehand, just as we did.
Now, in the last section of the developer panel in Apple's developer portal, which is 
named Provisioning Profiles, click to add a new provisioning profile. Then, you will 
be prompted to four different screens:
• Select Type: In the first screen, you can choose whether the profile you are 
going to generate is going to be the one for development that will be used  
to make the development/test build or the one for distribution that will be 
used to make the final store build. So, keep in mind what you will choose 
now; you will have to carry out the same steps again to generate the other 
one. At the end of the day, you will need to make both build types in 
the process of making any iOS game. So, ensure that you select iOS App 
Development in one instance and App Store in the other instance.
• Select App ID: On the second screen, you will need to select your App ID. 
So, if it is your first time creating a game/app, then you will find only one 
App ID that we already generated earlier in the second section of the iOS 
developer portal panel. However, if you have made several App IDs before, 
then you need to pick the correct one.
• Select certificate: In this screen, you will need to select the correct  
certificate. As you can see, this screen looks like a smart one. If you are 
already generating a Development Provisioning Profile, the screen will  
show you only the development certificates, from which you have to select 
the correct one (in case you have more than one), and if you are generating a 
Distribution Provisioning Profile, it will list only the distribution certificates. 
Pick the correct one and click on Continue.

--- Page 37 ---
Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal® Engine – Installing and Setting Up
[ 22 ]
• Select devices: This is not a mandatory screen. What I mean is that it is not 
necessary to see it every time you generate a profile. For example, if you are 
generating a development profile, you must see this screen, as it will ask you 
to select the authorized devices to run the game/app. However, if you are 
generating a Distribution Provisioning Profile, it does make sense to never ask 
you to select devices, as the game will be published and should be running  
on any valid device that downloaded/purchased it in the correct way via the 
App Store.
• Name the profile: Feel free to use any name that you can identify later. 
Usually, you enter the game name with a word, for example 
Development 
or Developer, that will make your organizer in XCode look a lot more clean 
and organized. Also, as this will be our last screen in the process, you will see 
that it shows the choices you have made in the previous steps and tells you 
the type, App ID, certificates, and the number of devices that will be listed in 
the profile. Ensure that you have entered a good name and all the choices are 
correct. Now, hit the Generate button.
• Download: The process of generating the profile will take a few seconds 
and then will automatically take you to a download screen; you can/must 
download this profile. Then, redo the same process for a profile of the other 
type (development or distribution). After you finish the process for the other 
file, keep those files in a safe place, as we will use them later. Keep in mind 
that with each new game we create, we will need to generate a new App  
ID and only two provisioning profiles (development and distribution).  
The certificate and devices will remain the same, except if you want to add 
new devices or change the certificate or update it in case it expires.
Now you've made one of the most important steps in your iOS game development 
pipeline. No matter what you will make inside the editor, without a valid 
provisioning profile, you will not be able to test in your device or publish the  
game to the App Store.

--- Page 38 ---
Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
Summary
Now, you have completed the process of getting UE4 source code or a precompiled 
version and getting your own developer account. You have also learned how to 
build your own Unreal Engine version using the GitHub source code within XCode, 
and set the whole thing up correctly to avoid any errors/issues in the future.
Building a game profile is essential to start making and testing any iOS game using 
UE4 or any other technology. Now, you will not only be able to make a game profile, 
but also build a developer certificate from scratch and associate some devices as  
test devices.
Now, with all of this in your pocket, it is time to run Unreal Engine and start 
building the stepping stones for all the games we are going to make in this book. 
Making an iOS game requires some procedures inside Unreal Engine regardless of 
the game type, genre, or inputs. In Chapter 2, Methods and Tools to Create Your Games, 
we will prepare a sample project, which will be the core of many of our upcoming 
games. Also, we will discuss the techniques and methods that can be used to build 
our games. So, if you are ready, turn the page and jump directly to Chapter 2, Methods 
and Tools to Create Your Games. However, if you have not built a game profile yet, 
then ensure that you can build one first!

--- Page 40 ---
Methods and Tools to  
Create Your Games
When Unreal Engine 4 was made available to the public in early 2014, it held within 
its new features, a new major feature called the Blueprints editor. Everyone expected 
that the engine would still use and support the Kismet editor from Unreal Engine 
3, but we found that Epic removed it and replaced it with a brand new and more 
powerful editor for game/gameplay logic scripting.
In the course of this book, we'll use this new system to build up our content and 
games, and in this chapter, we'll cover the following topics:
• Blueprints inside Unreal and its usage and types
• iOS platform-specific nodes
• Blueprints—tips and tricks
• iOS project pipeline with Unreal
• Setting up project settings
• Building into a device
Blueprints inside Unreal Engine
Essentially, a blueprint makes everything in the game logic clear and easy to follow. 
When creating a game with UE4, a blueprint does exactly this: makes writing code or 
game logic much easier.
If you have had the chance to work with the free, limited version of Unreal Engine 3, 
which was UDK, you will know that the scripting inside UDK was based on one of 
two things: either using the scripting language called Unreal Script, or using Kismet.

--- Page 41 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 26 ]
The Blueprints system in UE4 is almost the only, and certainly the most common 
way to build game logic efficiently and fast. It is the new version of the old system 
in UE3 called Kismet, that was not efficient when it came to refactoring the logic for 
different levels inside the same game. The engine supports C++ game code as well, 
but in that case I would not consider it as scripting, as C++ cannot be a scripting 
language and is pure programming!
With a simple graph of four nodes like the following one, you will be able to save  
the time taken to write code. The following graph says that:
• If the player presses Jump, then the character controller executes the 
respective jump function
• If the player inputs Horizontal axis, then the controller will use the Add 
Movement function with a specific amount of moment, and a direction  
(values passed through the function).
To write similar code in any programming language, you would spend 10 minutes 
and write at least 50 lines of code, but with a blueprint, all that you need is 4 nodes 
and 5 seconds of your time! For more efficient usage of the blueprints system, if you 
are a programmer, you can write your own blueprint node in C++ that executes a set 
of functionalities. This will save you the time taken to connect several nodes or write 
lots of code multiple times.


--- Page 42 ---
Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Different types of blueprints
There are two types of blueprints; when you start building logic for each of them, 
you will be using the same nodes with similar mechanisms. However, each type  
has its own usage and its own way to execute. The different types of blueprints are:
• The class blueprint: This is the most commonly used blueprint type during 
the process of building the gameplay elements. The easiest way to think about 
it is that each entity in the world is a blueprint as long as the entity has to act, 
behave, or do any logic type. These types of blueprints are very powerful, as 
you can use them anywhere inside your project; you can even recycle them  
to be used in another project somehow! You can have any number of these;  
it depends on your game and world size and complexity. A good example  
of a class blueprint can be an enemy blueprint or a collectable object.
• The level blueprint: As the previous type is a per-entity or per-object 
blueprint, this one is a per-level blueprint. This means that each level has its 
own blueprint that can be used only in the same level, and is used to control 
the current level entities and blueprints. Connecting some cloud objects with 
raindrop particles is a good example of what a level blueprint can achieve.
As they are only exposed per-level, this means that their number will always 
be limited to your number of levels; so if your project contains 20 maps/
levels, it means that you have exactly 20 level blueprints!


--- Page 43 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 28 ]
The need for blueprints
Choosing blueprints to make the course for this book came as a result of a hard 
decision. As a programmer, I like to write code all the time, even when working  
with node-based editors such as Unreal's blueprint system. I still tend to write 
pseudo code first to arrange my ideas and then apply this code to the engine in  
the shape of blueprint node connections. So, here are the major reasons that will 
make us use blueprints:
• As I mentioned earlier, blueprints are not a code-based system; a beginner 
can understand them and can start building stuff and improvising from the 
lessons here and building new content. A new programmer can understand 
the basics of programming and the construction of game/gameplay code 
from node-based graphs.
A hardcore programmer can learn how to adapt his vast knowledge to the 
modern scripting editors.
Game designers or perhaps artists can also use it to build gameplay logic, 
levels and construction scripts, or game systems and subsystems.
In spite of being a programmer,  it took me some time to adapt to the 
blueprints and node-based programming editors in general, as it is a  
process of generating code without writing it, which is totally different  
from what I have used over the years.
• Blueprints give you full access to all of the engine functions and methods. 
Using the blueprints doesn't mean that you will miss some parts of the 
engine; you will have full access to all you need in order to build the most 
complex game logic by controlling all of the game elements, such as audio, 
physics, rendering, animations, and inputs.
• With blueprints, you can make small logic changes and run it directly.  
All that you need to do is click on Save, and then you are free to hit the  
play button to test your logic. However, using code like C++ requires that  
you build or compile, which is a bit time consuming in the long run, especially 
if you are a person who likes to make sure that every piece runs fine and acts 
as it should before moving on to build a new part of the game logic.

--- Page 44 ---
Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
• As blueprints are not a text-based method, it saves you some time , disk space, 
and money that would have otherwise been spent to purchase and install an 
IDE to use. If you are going to use blueprints only with Unreal, and you have 
no intention of making any changes with the engine source code,  I would 
recommend that you directly download the prebuilt version. Keep in mind 
that you still need XCode on your computer to be able to make a real build  
on your device, otherwise you can keep testing in the editor safely.
• Some people have reported that blueprints are slow, maybe ten times slower 
than C++ Unreal Engine-based projects, but my advice for you is to ignore 
such heresy and to go and try it yourself! I used both systems and I could not 
find any difference: both games-based systems run fine for me on Windows, 
Mac, Android, iOS, and HTML5. It might be slower in the editor, but a final 
build ran equally in both, and any lag that came with a huge logic load was 
only due to the conversion the editor made at runtime to change the nodes 
into executable code.
What is a node?
A node is the visual representation of a function. To make life easier, Unreal  
Engine 4 provides the ability to create logic without writing code, by just using  
and connecting nodes.
A node can have inputs, outputs, both, or, in some cases, nothing except the 
execution ports.
For example, a PrintString node is a visual representation of the typical printing 
function, but has even more parameters. You can pass a string value to the In String 
input, or a Boolean value to the print options, or even a color variable to TextColor; 
however, as you can see, the nodes have no outputs. The white in and out arrows 
are not considered inputs or outputs, they are the function start and end, which 
represent the curly braces in a normal function.


--- Page 45 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 30 ]
Another example can be a node like Event Hit, which is an event node having no 
inputs, and usually has no execution as it executes itself. However, as you can see, it 
has lots of outputs, which always vary based on the current situation of the hit event.
The iOS/Mobile-only nodes
Unreal Engine is a cross-platform engine, which means that you write one block  
of code and then deploy it to several platforms, but not all nodes are made as  
general nodes to be used with all platforms. But there are a few nodes that are 
platform-specific, or in other words are nodes that can be run and executed 
successfully only on specific platforms:
• Input Touch: This is one of the functions/events that get executed 
automatically. Whenever the player touches his screen, this function  
will return the finger index and the touch coordinates. With this  
returned information, you can do all of the input magic that can be  
done for a touch screen device.
You have two choices when the player touches: either execute the rest  
of the code when the touch starts, or when it is released.


--- Page 46 ---
Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
• Event Begin Input Touch: This is an event by actor, which means it gets 
executed when the actor holding the node in its graph gets touched while  
click events are enabled.
• Event End Input Touch: This is an event by actor, which means it gets 
executed when the actor holding it in its graph gets touch ended while  
click events are enabled.
• Event Touch Enter: This is an event by actor, which means it gets executed 
when the actor holding it in its graph gets a touch moved over it while click 
events are enabled.
• Event Touch Leave: This is an event by actor, which means it gets executed 
when the actor holding it in its graph gets a touch moved over it and left while 
click events are enabled.


--- Page 47 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 32 ]
• Write Leaderboard Integer: This allows you to write a leaderboard integer 
value for a state name and submit it. It requires a player controller (which 
is the current class used by the player to control and navigate), a state name 
(which is a representation of the leaderboard value on the game center), 
and the value of this state. This returns just one value: either 
true or false 
indicating the successful or otherwise completion of the process.
• Read Leaderboard Integer: This queries for the value of an integer  
(Stat Name). This function requires two inputs: the stat name and the player 
controller. It can succeed and return the integer value to you as a Leaderboard 
Value, or it can fail for some reason, such as no connection to the Internet.
• Flush Leaderboards: As its name implies, this flushes the leaderboard values 
into the database. This requires the player controller as the input, as all other 
online services do, and the session name which is the same as State Name too.


--- Page 48 ---
Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
• Show Platform Specific Leaderboard Screen: This gets executed when the 
player wants to check the leaderboard screen. It opens either the Google 
Play services leaderboard or the Game Center leaderboard depending on 
the running platform. It takes only a string value, which is the category 
name, as an input, and is the same as 
State Name from the read and write 
leaderboard functions.
• Cache Achievements: Executing this starts caching and fetching the player 
saved achievement's progress from the online service (Google Play or Game 
Center), and it can succeed or fail depending on the connection, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
• Cache Achievements Description : This works in a similar manner as Cache 
Achievements, except that it fetches the achievement's description itself. 
So it fetches the ID info to the device (such as the achievement name or 
proper text based on the achievement state), depending on whether he has 
unlocked this Achievement ID or it is still locked. Also, sometimes you have 
to change the description, let's say, to fix a typo, then it needs to be updated 
on the player's device.


--- Page 49 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 34 ]
• Get Cached Achievements Progress : With the achievement ID, you can start 
using the data you've already fetched via Cache Achievements, perhaps 
by sending it to the UI to show it on the screen. The node can return two 
values; the first one is a Boolean of either 
True or False with regard to the 
existence of the ID. The other returned value is the result itself as a float 
value named Progress.
• Get Cached Achievements Description: With the achievement ID, you 
can start using the data you've already fetched via Cache Achievement 
Description, perhaps by sending it to the UI to show it on the screen.  
The node can return several values, the first is a Boolean of either 
True or 
False with regard to the existence of the ID. Get Cached Achievement 
Description returns the achievement name/title, so you can use it as a title 
for the achievement in your UI or in your notification screen. It also returns 
the proper text to be used. In case the achievement is Locked or Unlocked, 
then you can display the correct ones based on the player's current state.
• Write Achievement Progress: Whenever the player unlocks an achievement 
locally, you will need to save it to the online system you are using. This node 
allows you to do this by adding a name/ID to the achievement to be used 
to fetch it in later sessions. You also need to input a value for it. The same 
inputs are returned after finishing to ensure that it was sent to its correct 
place with its correct value.

--- Page 50 ---
Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
 
• Show Platform Specific Achievements Screen: If you want to have an 
Achievements button in your game that aims to open the Game Center 
achievements screen or Google Play achievement screen, using this node  
will allow you to pop up this screen directly.
• EXPERIMENTAL Show Ad Banner: If you are going to use ads in your 
game to earn money, then you will never find anything easier than Unreal 
Engine to handle it. By executing this node, you force the game to show ads, 
and as you can see, it has only one parameter as an input. By marking Show 
on Bottom Of Screen, the ad banner will be shown at the bottom, but if you 
set the check box to false, the banner will appear on the top of the screen. 
Keep in mind that it is named EXPERIMENTAL as it is not finalized yet. 
While you are reading this book, you might find the name is different;  
which may mean that it is officially released.


--- Page 51 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 36 ]
• EXPERIMENTAL Hide Ad Banner: This is also an experimental function 
aimed at hiding the banner, but still being able to show it again as it is still 
running, behind the player view. Note that it has no inputs or outputs, you 
just execute it.
• EXPERIMENTAL Close Ad Banner: This is another experimental node for 
ads. Using this node you can terminate/close the current banner, and then 
you can initialize a new banner using Show Ad Banner. This node has no 
inputs or outputs.
• Get Input Motion State: Using this function will return a set of  
useful coordinates to be used for device tilting, acceleration, and  
rotation-based games. It is normally known as an accelerometer or  
gyroscope in mobile devices.
One important thing to note about this node is that it can only 
be found in a blueprint of the PlayerController class type. 
Also, it returns 4 different vector values: Tilt, Rotation Rate, 
Gravity, and Acceleration.


--- Page 52 ---
Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Blueprints – tips and tricks
The blueprints editor, like any other editor in the world, has its own hidden tricks 
that can be useful. This doesn't mean that you wouldn't be productive without it,  
but these tips and tricks make your life easier and help you progress faster. Since  
the engine was released, I started to sail in the blueprint editor world to figure out 
how I can make the best use of it. I found this:
• The thing that most of the users don't know is that the blueprint editor  
is not limited to using the mouse keys to navigate, manipulate, and  
connect nodes. There are many hot keys that can help you attain faster work 
flow. For a full list of the hot keys, you can refer to the documentation at  
https://docs.unrealengine.com/latest/INT/Engine/Blueprints/
UserGuide/CheatSheet/index.html.
• Inserting nodes using right-click in the editor can be tricky. Right-clicking 
in an empty area will show you the nodes menu named All Actions for this 
Blueprint with all of the available nodes in the Unreal Engine editor for the 
current blueprint. This might be too complex for you sometimes, especially  
if you are a new developer.
However, when you draw a line from an output node, you will find a small 
tooltip with the text Place a new node. If you release the mouse button in an 
empty area, the menu that appears named with the dragged node name (in 
my case Flipbook), contains only those nodes that can fit and work correctly 
with the output socket you used for this drag action.


--- Page 53 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 38 ]
• When you use custom functions or events, if you double-click on the 
function/call, it will move your graph to show you the original function/ 
structure so that you can make changes to it. It is a very useful trick,  
which can save much of your time if your graphs are gigantic.
• When you add a new variable, let's say a Boolean (which means it is a 
variable that takes either a 
True or False value), you will be unable to set 
a variable's default value until you press the Compile button in the top-left 
corner of the editor. So, as with the code, you need to compile and run to  
see the result, but in a faster way. Then the question mark on the button  
will change to a true green mark post, after which the default values will  
be editable.
• After making a blueprint from any class type, let's say Character Blueprint, 
you will still be able to change the blueprint to a different class type. 
Sometimes, there will be some nodes that will be missed as not all of the 
blueprint classes share the same nodes, and sometimes you will get errors 
that need to be fixed; but at the end of the day, you can change a blueprint 
from a class type to another class type. All you have to do is click on the 
Blueprint Props button from the top shelf of your blueprint graph editor  
and this will activate a panel on your right-hand side.


--- Page 54 ---
Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
In this new panel, you need to change Parent Class to any desired class. 
To be sure that the change has been made correctly, you will find that 
Character.h or whatever the first class name in the top-right corner  
of the graph editor will change to the new class name.
The iOS project pipeline
Through the next four chapters, we will be building four different games using Unreal 
Engine 4. There is no specific project pipeline that we should follow, but over the years, 
I have found that there are so many things that if organized early, will help us in our 
building and testing processes later. So here are the recommended and repetitive steps 
that you will need to perform for each game.
I prefer to explain these steps for setting up a project and getting it ready here,  
so that in each game chapter you can just go through the steps required to build the 
game and not the project and then the game. So, this part will be a reference for you, 
which you will need to execute at the beginning of each game, until you get used to 
that pipeline or invent your own way to prepare an iOS project with Unreal Engine.
Building the game's provisioning profiles
If you have been following the book from the first chapter, then you would know 
what a game profile is, and how and where to build it. So, first things first, you need 
to build two profiles for your game: development and distribution. Remember that 
both of them will be useless if you don't have installed certificates too.
Setting up the game provisioning profile
Epic gives you two choices regarding the setup of your game provisioning profiles. 
So you can put both files in either of these two places:
• Engine/Build/IOS/UE4Game.mobileprovision
• (Your Game Directory) /Build/IOS/(your Game Name).
mobileprovision
In the first case, you can place your provisioning profiles directly in the engine 
directory, but in that case you must name the profile UE4Game. This is not a good  
idea if you are going to work with more than one game at the same time, as you 
must keep that naming.

--- Page 55 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 40 ]
The second method, which I prefer to use, is a per-project method. In this, you 
place both of your provisioning profiles in your game directory inside the Build/
IOS director. You must then name both of your files with the game name, and the 
distribution one should have the Distro_ prefix.
For example, for the first game project that I'll be building in Chapter 3, Creating a 
Brick Breaking Game, the game profiles will be:
• Development: Game / Build/IOS/bricksbreakingPacket. 
mobileprovision
• Distribution : BricksBreakingGame/ Build/IOS/ Distro_
bricksbreakingPacket. mobileprovision
Creating a new project
Whenever you run Unreal Engine, the project window pops up giving you the  
choice to either run an old project or build a new one. There are four major things 
you should note in this window if you switch to the New Project tab:
• You can select a different directory to build your own projects rather than 
building them in the 
Documents/Unreal Engine directory. You just need  
to click on the small down arrow button next to the project name input field.
• There is an option called Include starter content, which should be 
unchecked, as this choice will add too many blueprints, models, and assets 
to your project. It is fine to add these if you are going to learn about them, or 
if you are going to build a game that has the look of those assets. However, 
during the process of our four games here, we will not need to use those 
assets, so let's save some space in our project by unchecking it.
• When you are going to give your project a name, ensure that you type the 
name without spaces and that it has less than 20 characters, otherwise you 
will get an error. For example, in the first game project, I named the project 
BricksBreakingGame rather than Bricks Breaking Game. The engine 
should give you feedback with a red error if you forget this.
• There are many start templates to use to build your game, some of them based 
on C++ code and the others based on blueprints. Normally, you should select a 
Blank template (which is the first one), otherwise I'll mention which template 
we are going to base our game on in the respective chapter.

--- Page 56 ---
Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Editing the project settings
After naming your project and clicking on Create Project, the engine will take  
a while to set it up and load it. When the editor opens and completes loading,  
you can navigate to the Edit menu and select Project Settings.
There are some steps that need to be carried out here to make the project ready for 
iOS development. As you can see, you have different tabs in the left-hand side panel. 
You can add a project name and company info to your Description screen. You can 
set up the game levels and the default map in your Maps and Modes screen.

--- Page 57 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 42 ]
You can make so many changes to your project, but the four most important screens 
to which we want to make changes should be as follows:
• Supported Platforms: You need to ensure that iOS is supported for the project.
• Input: Ensure that you mark Use Mouse for Touch to enable the mouse 
clicks to be considered as touch input. Ensure that you disable Always  
Show Touch Interface and Show Console on Four Finger Tap, and clear 
Default Touch Interface. If there is a project which has different input 
configurations, it will be mentioned in the respective project chapter.

--- Page 58 ---
Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
• Rendering: Switch off Mobile HDR, as none of our games will need it. All of 
our games will be 2D and are not based on light as they are based on shaders.


--- Page 59 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 44 ]
• iOS: If the game has online features, we will use Enable Game Center 
Support. However, I prefer to keep it switched off for now, as the online 
features will be discussed later in Chapter 7, Monetizing your Game. You will 
now see that all of the iOS options are grayed out and there is a warning 
message telling you that the project needs to be configured. So click on 
Configure Now and it will enable everything and make the project match  
our targeted platform.


--- Page 60 ---
Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
Editing the *.plist file
After configuring the project for iOS, you will have an info.Plist file generated for 
your project. You can either click on the Open PList Folder button or navigate to the 
GameProject/Build/IOS directory, and you will find a text file with your game's 
name and the .plist extension. Open this file and change the two string values 
<key>CFBundleURLName</key> and <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key> to the one 
you used while building the provisioning profile. In my case, it is com.Muhammad.
BriksBreakingForBook. You should have something like this:
Feel free to dig more and investigate the PLIST file. It looks like a small and simple text 
file, but the fact is that this file can twist your iOS product by 180 degrees. For example, 
with some tweaks inside the PLIST file you can change the final game executable file 
name or add a glass effect to the game icon, change the game version number or even 
switch the game WiFi feature off. In a nutshell, this file is the director and manger that 
feeds the game/app with all of the information that should distinguish it.
Building a project
With earlier versions of Unreal, building a project for iOS wasn't particularly easy. 
However, with UE4, you can now build and run your project with just one click. 
You have two different options for how you can build your project into your device: 
launching and packaging.

--- Page 61 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 46 ]
Launching
Launching allows you to launch only the current level to test it in your device. It can be 
accessed from the top shelf of your editor, and when you press the little arrow button, 
it will give you a list of the available devices that you can launch the game into.
Packaging
Packaging allows you to build an *.ipa file, you can use any other application to 
push this file into your device to test it.
In addition to packaging the game, you need to navigate to File | Package Project | 
IOS and make sure that, while the packaging sub menu may look different for you, 
it will always contain the platforms supported by your OS. Currently, Mac supports 
only iOS and Mac, and Windows supports Windows, iOS, and Android.

--- Page 62 ---
Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
I always like to make a build for my empty project before I start adding content.  
This way, I can ensure that I set up the project correctly, rather than adding content 
and then getting a build failure, which will put me in a situation where I wouldn't 
know if the failure is a result of my incorrect content or incorrect project setup. So 
with each chapter, after preparing your game project, make an empty build to the 
device, just to ensure that you can push it correctly to the device.

--- Page 63 ---
Methods and Tools to Create Your Games
[ 48 ]
Summary
Now, you are aware of a whole new concept of gameplay scripting, and the why and 
how of using it. You learned about the several types of blueprints, when to use each 
of them, how you can change a class blueprint type at any time you want, and how 
to keep it clean from errors. You are now also able to create a clean Unreal Engine 4 
project from scratch and set it up correctly to match the iOS platform. Building and 
running a project with different build types is something essential for testing over 
time and now you know how easy it has become.
The next step for you is to start making games and learn how to script a gameplay.  
In the next chapter, we will begin a journey to build a physics-based game.

--- Page 64 ---
Creating a Brick  
Breaking Game
Have you ever thought about procedurally generated levels? Have you thought 
about how this could be done, how their logic works, and how their resources  
are managed?
With our example bricks game, you will get to the core point of generating colors 
procedurally for each block, every time the level gets loaded.
Physics has always been a huge and massively important topic in the process of 
developing a game. However, a brick breaking game can be made in many ways  
and using the many techniques that the engine can provide, but I choose to make  
it a physics-based game to cover the usage of the new, unique, and amazing 
component that Epic has recently added to its engine.
The 
Projectile component is a physics-based component for which you can  
tweak many attributes to get a huge variation of behaviors that you can use with  
any game genre.
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• Build your first multicomponent blueprints
• Understand more about the game modes
• Script a touch input
• Understand the Projectile component in depth
• Build a simple emissive material
• Use the dynamic material instances
• Start using the construction scripts

--- Page 65 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 50 ]
• Detect collisions
• Start adding sound effects to the game
• Restart a level
• Have a fully functional gameplay
The project structure
If you are going to use the already finished project that comes with this book, then 
you will find that it was made with Unreal Editor 4.30. If you are using a higher 
version, it might tell you that the project will be upgraded to a higher version,  
which is not possible. Just keep this in mind!
For this game sample, I made a blank project template and selected to use the starter 
content so that I could get some cubes, spheres, and all other 3D basic meshes that 
will be used in the game. So, you will find the project structure still in the same  
basic structure, and the most important folder where you will find all the content  
is called Blueprints.
Building the blueprints
The game, as you might see in the project files, contains only four blueprints.  
As I said earlier, a blueprint can be an object in your world or even a piece of logic 
without any physical representation inside the game view. The four blueprints 
responsible for the game are explained here:
• ball: This is the blueprint that is responsible for the ball rendering and 
movement. You can consider it as an entity in the game world, as it has  
its own representation, which is a 3D ball.
• platform: This one also has its visual representation in the game world.  
This is the platform that will receive the player input.
• levelLayout: This one represents the level itself and its layout, walls, blocks, 
and game camera.
• bricksBreakingMode: Every game or level made with Unreal Engine should 
have a game mode blueprint type. This defines the main player, the controller 
used to control the gameplay, the pawn that works in the same way as the 
main player but has no input, the HUD for the main UI controller, and the 
game state that is useful in multiplayer games. Even if you are using the 
default setting, it will be better to make a space holder one!

--- Page 66 ---
Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
Gameplay mechanics
I've always been a big fan of planning the code before writing or scripting it. So, I'll 
try to keep the same habit here as well; before making each game, I'll explain how 
the gameplay workflow should be. With such a habit, you can figure out the weak 
points of your logic, even if you didn't build it. It helps you develop quickly and 
more efficiently.
As I mentioned earlier, the game has only three working blueprints, and the fourth 
one is used to organize the level (which is not gameplay logic and has no logic at all). 
Here are the steps that the game should follow one by one:
1. At the start of the game, the levelLayout blueprint will start instantiating 
the bricks and set a different color for each one.
2. The levelLayut blueprint sets the rendering camera to the one we want.
3. The ball blueprint starts moving the ball with a proper velocity and sets a 
dynamic material for the ball mesh.
4. The platform blueprint starts accepting the input events on a frame-by-frame 
basis from mouse or touch inputs, and sets a dynamic material for the platform 
mesh.
5. If the ball blueprint hits any other object, it should never speed up or slow 
down; it should keep the same speed.
6. If the ball blueprint crossed the bottom line, it should restart the level.
7. If the player pressed the screen or clicked on the mouse, the platform 
blueprint should move only on the y axis to follow the finger or the  
mouse cursor.
8. If the ball blueprint hits any brick from the levelLayout blueprint,  
it should destroy it.
9. The ball plays some sound effects. Depending on the surface it hits,  
it plays a different sound.
Starting a new level
As the game will be based on one level only and the engine already gives us this 
new pretty level with a sky dome and light effects with some basic assets, all of this 
will not be necessary for our game. So, you need to go to the File menu, select New 
Level, add it somewhere inside your project files, and give it a special name. In my 
case, I made a new folder named 
gameScene to hold my level (or any other levels if 
my game is a multilevel game) and named it mainLevel.

--- Page 67 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 52 ]
Now, this level will never get loaded into the game without forcing the engine to do 
that. The Unreal Editor gives you a great set of options to define which is the default 
map/level to be loaded when the game starts or when the editor runs. Even when 
you ship the game, the Unreal Editor tells us which levels should be shipped and 
which levels shouldn't be shipped to save some space.
Open the Edit menu and then open Project Settings. When the window pops up, 
select the Maps & Modes section and set Game Default Map to the newly created 
level. Editor Startup Map should also have the same level:
Building the game mode
Although a game mode is a blueprint, I prefer to always separate its creation from  
the creation of the game blueprints, as it contains zero work for logic or even graphs. 
A game mode is essential for each level, not only for each game.
Right-click in an empty space inside your project directory and select Blueprint 
under the Basic assets section. When the Pick Parent Class window pops up,  
select the last type of blueprint, which is called Game Mode, and give your newly 
created blueprint a name, which, in my case, is bricksBreakingMode.
Now, we have a game mode for the game level; this mode will not work at all  
without being connected to the current level (the empty level I made in the previous 
section) somehow.
Go to World Settings by clicking on the icon in the top shelf of the editor (you need 
to get used to accessing World Settings, as it has so many options that you will need 
to tweak them to fit your games):

--- Page 68 ---
Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
The World Settings panel will be on the right-hand side of your screen. Scroll down 
to the Game Mode part and select the one you made from the Game Mode Override 
drop-down menu.
If you cannot find the one you've made, just type its name, and the smart menu will 
search over the project to find it.
Building the game's main material
As the game is an iOS game, we should work with caution when adding elements 
and code to save the game from any performance overhead, glitches, or crashes. 
Although the engine can run a game with the Light option on an iOS device, I 
always prefer to stay as far away as possible from using lights/directional lights  
in an iOS game, as a directional light source on mealtime would mean recalculating 
all the vertices. So, if the level has 10k vertices with two directional lights, it will be 
calculated as 30k vertices.
The best way to avoid using a light source for such a simple game like the brick 
breaking game is to build a special material that can emulate a light emission;  
this material is called an emissive material.
In your project panel, right-click in an empty space (perhaps inside the 
materials 
folder) and choose a material from the Basic Assets section. Give this material a 
name (which, in my case, is gameEmissiveMaterial) and then double-click to open 
the material editor.

--- Page 69 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 54 ]
As you can see, the material editor for a default new material is almost empty, apart 
from one big node that contains the material outputs with a black colored material. 
To start adding new nodes, you will need to right-click in an empty space of your 
editor grid and then either select a node or search for nodes by name; both ways 
work fine.
The emissive material is just a material with Color and Emissive Color; you can see 
these names in your output list, which means you will need to connect some sort of 
nodes or graphs to these two sockets of the material output.
Now, add the following three new nodes:
• VectorParameter: This represents the color; you can pick a color by  
clicking on the color area on the left-hand panel of the screen or on the 
Default Value parameter.
• ScalarParameter: This represents a factor to scale the color of the material; 
you can set its Default Value to 2, which works fine for the game.
• Multiply: This will multiply two values (the color and the scalar) to give a 
value to be used for the emission.
With these three nodes in your graph, you might figure out how it works. The basic 
color has to be added to the base color output, and then the Multiply result of the 
base color and scalar will be added to the emissive color output of the material:

--- Page 70 ---
Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
You can rename the nodes and give them special names, which will be useful 
later on. I named the VectorParameter node BaseColor and the Scalar node 
EmissiveScalar.
You can check out the difference between the emissive material 
you made and another default material by applying both to two 
meshes in a level without any light. The default material will light 
the mesh in black as it expects a light source, but the emissive one 
will make it colored and shiny.
Building the blueprints and components
I prefer to call all the blueprints for this game actors as all of them will be based on a 
class in the engine core. This class usually represents any object with or without logic 
in the level. Although blueprints based on the actor class are not accepting input, you 
will learn a way to force any actor blueprint to get input events. This is the reason for 
picking the actor class as a general class for the course of this book. In this section, 
you will build the different blueprints for the game and add components for each 
one of them. Later on, in another section, you will build the logic and graphs. As I 
always say, building and setting all the components and the default values should be 
the first thing you do in any game, and then adding the logic should follow. Do not 
work on both simultaneously!

--- Page 71 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 56 ]
Building the layout blueprint
The layout blueprint should include the bricks that the players are going to break, 
the camera that renders the level, and the walls that the ball is going to collide with.
Start making it by adding an Actor blueprint in your project directory. Name it 
levelLayout and double-click on it to open the blueprint editor.
The blueprint editor, by default, contains the following three subeditors inside it;  
you can navigate between them via the buttons in the top-right corner:
• Defaults: This is used to set the default values of the blueprint class type
• Components: This is used to add different components to build and structure 
the blueprint
• Graph: This is where we will add scripting logic
The majority of the time, you will be working with the components and graph 
editors only, as the default editor's default values always work the best:


--- Page 72 ---
Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
Open the component graph and start adding these components:
• Camera: This will be the component that renders the game. As you can 
see in the preceding screenshot, I added one component and left its name 
as Camera1. It was set as ROOT of the blueprint; it holds all the other 
components as children underneath its hierarchy.
 ° Changed Values: The only value you need to change in the camera 
component is Projection Mode. You need to set it to Orthographic, 
as it will be rendered as a 2D game, and keep Ortho Width as 512, as 
it will make the screen show all the content in a good size. Feel free to 
use different values based on the content of your level design.
Orthographic cameras work without depth, and they are 
recommended more in 2D games. On the other hand, the 
perspective camera has more depth, and it is better to be 
used with any games with 3D content.


--- Page 73 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 58 ]
• Static Mesh: To be able to add meshes as boundaries or triggering areas 
to collide with the ball, you will need to add cubes to work as collision 
walls, perhaps hidden walls. The best way to add this is by adding 
four static meshes and aligning and moving them to build them as a 
scene stage. Renaming all of them is also a good way to go. To be able 
to distinguish between them, you can name them as I named them: 
StaticMeshLeftMargin, StaticMeshRightMargin, StaticMeshTopMargin, 
and StaticMeshBottomMargin. The first three are the left, right, and top 
margins; they will be working as collision walls to force the ball to bounce  
in different directions. However, the bottom one will work as a trigger area 
to restart the level when the ball passes through it.
 ° Changed Values: You need to set Static Mesh for them as the cube 
and then start to scale and move it to build the scene.


--- Page 74 ---
Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
• For the walls, you need to add the Wall tag for the first three meshes in the 
Component Tags options area, and for the bottom trigger, you need to add 
another tag; something like deathTrigger works fine. These tags will be used 
by the gameplay logic to detect whether the ball hits a wall and you need to 
play a sound or whether it hits a death area and you need to restart the level.
• In the Collision section for each static mesh, you need to set both 
Simulation Generates Hit Events and Generate Overlap Events to True. 
Also, for Collision Preset, you can select Block All, as this will create solid 
walls to block any other object from passing:
• Finally, from the Rendering options section, you need to select the emissive 
material we have made to be able to see those static meshes, and you need to 
mark Hidden in Game as True to hide those objects. Keep in mind that you 
can keep those objects in the game for debugging reasons, and when you are 
sure that they are in the correct place, you can move to this option again and 
remark it as True.


--- Page 75 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 60 ]
• Billboard: For now, you can think about the billboard component as a point 
in space with a representation icon, and this is how it is mostly used inside 
UE4 as the engine does not support an independent transform component yet. 
However, billboards have always been used to show the contents that always 
face the camera, such as particles, text, or any other thing you need to always 
get rendered from the same angle. As the game will be generating the blocks/
bricks during the gameplay, you will need to have some points to define 
where to build or to start building those bricks. You can add five billboard 
points, rename them, and rearrange them to look like a column. You don't 
have to change any values for them, as you will be using their position in space 
values only! I named those five points as firstRowPoint, SecondRowPoint, 
thirdRowPoint, fourthRowPoint, and fifthRowPoint.
Building the ball blueprint
Start making the ball blueprint by adding an Actor blueprint in your project directory. 
Name it Ball and double-click on it to open the blueprint editor. Then, navigate to the 
Components subeditor if you are not ready. Start adding the following components to 
the blueprint:
• The sphere will work as the collision surface for the Ball blueprint. So, for this 
reason, you will need to set its Collision option to Simulation Generates Hit 
Events and Generate Overlap Events to True. Also, set the Collision Preset 
option to Block All to act in a manner similar to the walls from the layout 
blueprint. You need to set the Sphere Radius option from the Shape section 
to 26.0 so that it is of a good size that fits the screen's overall size.

--- Page 76 ---
Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
• The process for adding static meshes is the same as you did earlier, but this 
time, you will need to select a sphere mesh from the standard assets that 
came with the project. You will also need to set its material to the project 
default material you made earlier in this chapter. Also, after selecting it,  
you might need to adjust its Scale to 0.5 in all three axes to fit the collision 
sphere size. Feel free to move the static mesh component on the x, y, and z 
axes till it fits the collision surface.
• The projectile movement component is the most important one for the Ball 
blueprint, or perhaps it is the most important one throughout this chapter, 
as it is the one responsible for the ball movement and velocity and for its 
physics behaviors. After adding the components, you will need to make 
some tweaks to it to allow it to give the behavior that matches the game. 
Keep in mind that any small amount of change in values or variables will 
lead you to have a completely different behavior, so feel free to play through 
the values and test them to get some crazy ideas about what you can achieve 
and what you can get.

--- Page 77 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 62 ]
• For changed values, you need to set Projectile Gravity Scale to 0.0 from 
within the Projectile options; this will allow the ball to fly in the air without  
a gravity force to bring it down (or any other direction for a custom gravity).
• For Projectile Bounces, you will need to mark Should Bounce as True.  
In this case, the projectile physics will be forced to keep bouncing with the 
amount of bounciness you set. As you want the ball to keep bouncing over 
the walls, you need to set the value to 1.0 to give it full bounciness power:
• From the Velocity section, you will need to enter a velocity for the ball to 
start using when the game runs; otherwise, the ball will never move. As you 
want the first bounce of the ball to be towards the blocks, you need to set the 
Z value to a high number, such as 300, and give it more level design sense. 
It shouldn't bounce in a vertical line, so it is better to give some force on the 
horizontal axis Y as well as move the ball in a diagonal direction. So, let's  
add 300 into Y as well.


--- Page 78 ---
Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Building the platform blueprint
Start making the platform blueprint by adding an Actor blueprint in your project 
directory. Name it platform and double-click on it to open the blueprint editor. 
Then, navigate to the Components subeditor if you are not there already. You will 
add only one component, and it will work for everything. You want to add a Static 
Mesh component, but this time, you will be selecting the Pipe mesh; you can select 
whatever you want, but the pipe works the best.
Don't forget to set its material to be the same emissive material as we used earlier to  
be able to see it in the game view, and set its Collision option to Simulation Generates 
Hit Events and Generate Overlap Events to True. Also, Collision Preset should be  
set to Block All to act in the same manner as the walls from the layout blueprint.
Building the graphs and logic
Now, as all the blueprints have been set up with their components, it's time to start 
adding the gameplay logic/scripting. However, to be able to see the result of what 
you are going to build, you first need to drag and drop the three blueprints inside 
your scene and organize them to look like an actual level.


--- Page 79 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 64 ]
As the engine is a 3D engine and there is no support yet for 2D physics, you might 
notice that I added two extra objects to the scene (giant cubes), which I named 
depthPreservingCube and depthPreservingCube2. These objects are here basically 
to prevent the ball from moving in the depth axis, which is X in Unreal Editor. This is 
how both the new preserving cubes look from a top view:
One general step that you will perform for all blueprints is to set the dynamic material 
for them. As you know, you made only one material and applied it to the platform 
and to the ball. However, you also want both to look different during the gameplay. 
Changing the material color right now will change both objects' visibility. However, 
changing it during the gameplay via the construction script and the dynamic material 
instances feature will allow you to have many colors for many different objects, but 
they will still share the same material.
So, in this step, you will make the platform blueprint and the ball blueprint. I'll 
explain how to make it for the ball, and you will perform the same steps to make it 
for the platform. Select the ball blueprint first and double-click to open the editor; 
then, this time navigate to the subeditor graphs to start working with the nodes.

--- Page 80 ---
Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
You will see that there are two major tabs inside the graph; one of them is named 
Construction Script. This unique tab is responsible for the construction of the blueprint 
itself. Open the Construction Script tab that always has a Construction Script node by 
default; then, drag and drop the StaticMesh component of the ball from the panel on 
the left-hand side. This will cause you to have a small context menu that has only two 
options: Get and Set. Select Get, and this will add a reference to the static mesh.
Now, drag a line from Construction Script, leave it in an empty space, add a Create 
Dynamic Material Instance node from the context menu, and set its Source Material 
option to the material we want to instance (which is the emissive material). However, 
keep in mind that if you are using a later version, Epic introduces a more easy way 
to access the Create Dynamic Material Instance node by just dragging a line from 
Static Mesh-ball inside Graph, and not Construction Script.
Now, connect the static mesh to be the target and drag a line out of Return Value of 
the Create Dynamic Material Instance node. From the context menu, select the first 
option, which is Promote to a Variable; this will add a variable to the left-panel list. 
Feel free to give it a name you can recognize, which, in my case, is thisColor. Now, 
the whole thing should look like this:
Now that you've created the dynamic material instance, you need to set the new 
color for it. To do this, you need to go back to the event graph and start adding the 
logic for it. I'll add it to the ball also, and you need to apply it again in Event Graph 
of the platform blueprint.
Add an Event Begin Play node, which is responsible for the execution of some 
procedurals when the game starts. Drag a wire out of it and select the Set Vector 
Parameter Value node that is responsible for setting the value for the material.
Now, add a reference for the thisColor variable and connect it to Target of the Set 
Vector Parameter Value node. Last but not least, enter Parameter name that you 
used to build the material, which, in my case, is BaseColor.

--- Page 81 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 66 ]
Finally, set Value to a color you like; I picked yellow for the ball. Which color would 
you like to pick?
The layout blueprint graph
Before you start working with this section, you need to make several copies of the 
material we made earlier and give each one its own color. I made six different ones  
to give a variation of six colors to the blocks.
The scripts here will be responsible for creating the blocks, changing their colors, and 
finally, setting the game view to the current camera. To serve this goal, you need to 
add several variables with several types. Here are some variables:
• numberOfColumns: This is an integer variable that has a default value of 
six, which is the total number of columns per row.
• currentProgressBlockPosition: This is a vector type variable to hold the 
position of the last created block. It is very important because you are going 
to add blocks one after the other, so you want to define the position of the 
last block and then add spacing to it.
• aBlockMaterial: This is the material that will be applied to a specific block.
• materialRandomIndex: This is a random integer value to be used for 
procedural selected colors for each block.

--- Page 82 ---
Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
To make things more organized, I managed to make several custom events. You can 
think about them as a set of functions; each one has a block of procedurals to execute:
• Initialize The Blocks: This Custom Event node has a set of for loops that are 
working one by one on initializing the target blocks when the game starts. Each 
loop cycles six times from Index 0 to the number of columns index. When it is 
finished, it runs the next loop. Each loop body is a custom function itself, and 
they all run the same set of procedurals, except that they use a different row.
• chooseRandomMaterial: This custom event handles the process of picking a 
random material to be applied to in the process of creation. It works by setting 
a random value between 1 and 6 to the materialRandomIndex variable, and 
depending on the selected value, the aBlockMaterial variable will be set to a 
different material. This aBlockMaterial variable is the one that will be used to 
set the material of each created block in each iteration of the loop for each row.


--- Page 83 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 68 ]
• addRowX: I named this X here, but in fact, there are five functions to add the 
rows; they are addRow1, addRow2, addRow3, addRow4, and addRow5. All 
of them are responsible for adding rows; the main difference is the start point 
of adding the row; each one of them uses a different billboard transform, 
starting from firstRowPoint and ending with fifthRowPoint. You need to 
connect your first node as Add Static Mesh and set its properties as any 
other static mesh. You need to set its material to the emissive one. Set Static 
Mesh to Shape_Pipe_180, give it a brickPiece tag, and set its Collision 
options to Simulation Generates Hit Events and Generate Overlap Events 
to True. Also, Collision Preset has to be set to Block All to act in the same 
manner as the walls from the layout blueprint and receive the hit events, 
which will be the core of the ball detection. This created mesh will need a 
transform point to be instantiated in its cords. This is where you will need  
to pick the row point transform reference (depending on your row, you  
will select the point number), add it to a Make Transform node, and finally,  
set the new transform Y Rotation to -90 and its XYZ scale to 0.7, 0.7, 0.5  
to fit the correct size and flip the block to have a better convex look.
This second part of the addRow event should use the ChooseRandomMaterial 
custom event that you already made to select a material from among six random 
ones. Then, you can execute SetMaterial, make its Target the same mesh that was 
created via Add Static Mesh, and set its Material to aBlockMaterial; the material 
changes every time the chooseRandomMaterial event gets called.
Finally, you can use SetRelativeLocation of the billboard point that is responsible 
for that row to another position on the y axis, using the Make Vector and Add Int(+) 
nodes to add 75 units every time as a spacing between every two created blocks:

--- Page 84 ---
Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
Now, if you check the project files, you will find that the only difference is that there 
are five functions called addRow, and each of them uses a different billboard as a 
starting point to add the blocks. Now, if you run the version you made or the one 
within the project files, you will be able to see the generated blocks, and each time you 
stop and run the game, you will get a completely different color variation of the blocks.
There is one last thing to completely finish this blueprint. As you might have noticed, 
this blueprint contains the camera in its components. This means it should be the one 
that holds the functionality of setting this camera to be the rendering camera. So, in 
Even Begin Play, this functionality will be fired when the level starts. You need to 
connect the the Set View Target With Blend node that will set the camera to the Target 
camera, and you need to connect Get Player Controller (player 0 is the player number 
1) to the Target socket. This blueprint refers to New View Target. Finally, you need to 
call the initializeTheBlocks custom event, which will call all the other functions.


--- Page 85 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 70 ]
Congratulations! Now you have built your first functional and complex blueprint 
that contains the main and important functionalities everyone must use in any game. 
Also, you got the trick of how you can randomly generate or change things such as 
the color of the blocks to make the levels feel different every time.
The Ball blueprint graph
The main event node that will be used in the ball graph is Event Hit, which will 
be fired automatically every time the ball collider hits another collider. If you still 
remember, while creating the platform, walls, and blocks, we used to add tags for 
every static mesh to define them. Those names are used now. Using a node called 
Component Has Tag, we can compare the object component that the ball has hit 
with the value of the Component Has Tag node, and then, we either get a positive  
or negative result. So, this is how it should work:
• Whenever the ball gets hit with another collider, check whether it is a 
brickPiece tagged component. If this is true, then disable the collision of the 
brick piece via the Set Collision Enabled node and set it to No Collision to 
stop responding to any other collisions. Then, hide the brick mesh using the 
Set Visibility node and keep the New Visibility option unmarked, which 
means that it will be hidden. Then, play a sound effect of the hit to make it a 
more dynamic gameplay. You can play sound in many different ways, but 
let's use the Play Sound at Location node now, use the location of the ball 
itself, and use the hitBrick sound effect from the Audio folder by assigning 
it to the Sound slot of the Play Sound at Location node. Finally, reset the 
velocity of the ball using the Set Velocity node referenced by the Projectile 
Movement component and set it to XYZ 300, 0, 300:

--- Page 86 ---
Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
• If it wasn't a brickPiece tag, then let's check whether it is Component Has 
Tag of Wall. If this is the case, then let's use Play Sound at Location, use  
the location of the ball itself, and use the hitBlockingWall sound effect  
from the Audio folder by assigning it to the Sound slot of the Play Sound  
at Location node:


--- Page 87 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 72 ]
• If it wasn't tagged with Wall, then check whether it is finally tagged with 
deathTrigger. If this is the case, then the player has missed it, and the ball 
is not below the platform. So, you can use the Open Level node to load the 
level again and assign the level name as mainLevel (or any other level you 
want to load) to the Level Name slot:
The platform blueprint graph
The platform blueprint will be the one that receives the input from the player.  
As you learned in Chapter 2, Methods and Tools to Create Your Games, it is better to set 
Use Mouse For Touch in Project settings so you can write one logic and it works for 
both mouse input in the editor and for the touch input on the device. However, as 
you might remember, all the blueprints are based on an Actor.h class; this means, by 
default, they will not accept any input, and any scripting-based input will be ignored 
and will not give any result. So, you just need to define the player input to make the 
blueprint able to receive those events from the mouse, touch, or any other available 
input device. To do this, there are two ways, and I always like to use both these ways:
• Enable input node: I assume that you've already added the scripting 
nodes inside Event graph to set the dynamic material color via Set Vector 
Parameter Value. This means you already have an Event Begin Play node, 
so you need to connect its network to another node called Enable Input; this 
node is responsible for forcing the current blueprint to accept input events. 
Finally, you can set its Player Controller value to a Get Player Controller 
node and leave Player Index as 0 for the player number 1:

--- Page 88 ---
Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
• Autoreceive input option: By selecting the platform blueprint instance that 
you've dropped inside the scene from the Scene Outliner, you will see that 
it has many options in the Details panel on the right-hand side. By changing 
the Auto Receive Input option to Player 0 under the Input option, this will 
have the same effect as the previous solution:


--- Page 89 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 74 ]
Now, we can build the logic for the platform movement, and anything that is built 
can be tested directly in the editor or on the device. I prefer to break the logic into 
two pieces, and this will make it easier than it looks like for you:
• Get the touch state : In this phase, you will use the Input Touch  event that 
can be executed when a touch gets pressed or released. So based on the 
touch state, you will check via a Branch node whether the state is True or 
False. Your condition for this node should be Touch 1 index , as the game 
will not need more than one touch. Based on the state, I would like to set 
a custom Boolean variable named Touched and set its value to match the 
touch state. Then, you can add a Gate node to control the execution of the 
following procedurals based on the touch state (Pressed or Released) by 
connecting the two cases with the Open gate and the Close gate execution 
sockets. Finally, you can set the actor location and set it to use the Self actor 
as its target (which is the 
platform actor/blueprint) to change the platform 
location based on touches. Defining the New Location value is the next 
chunk of the logic:


--- Page 90 ---
Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
• Actor location: Using a Make Vector node, you can construct a new point 
position in the world made of X, Y, and Z coordinates. As the y axis will be the 
horizontal position, which will be based on the player's touch, only this needs 
to be changed over time. However, the X and Z positions will stay the same all 
the time, as the platform will never move vertically or in depth. The new vector 
position will be based on the touch phase. If the player is pressing, then the 
position should be matching the touch input position. However, if the players 
are not pressing, then the position should be the same as the last point the 
player had pressed. I managed to make a float variable named horizontalAxis; 
this variable will hold the correct Y position to be added to the Make Vector 
node. If the player is pressing the screen, then you need to get the finger press 
position by returning Impact Point by Break Hit Result via a Get Hit Result 
Under Finger By Channel node from the current active player. However, if the 
player is not touching the screen, then the horizontalAxis variable should stay 
the same as the last-know location for the Self actor. Then, it will set as it is 
into the Make Vector Y position value:
Now, you can save and build all the blueprints. Don't hesitate now or any time 
during the process of building the game logic to build or launch the game into a real 
device to check where you are.
The best way to learn more about the nodes and those minor changes is by building 
all the time into the divide and changing some values every time.

--- Page 91 ---
Creating a Brick Breaking Game
[ 76 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you went through the process of building your first Unreal iOS game. 
Also, you got used to making blueprints by adding nodes in different ways, connecting 
nodes, and adding several component types into the blueprint and changing its values.
Also, you learned how to enable input in an actor blueprint and get the touch and 
mouse input and fit them to your custom use.
You also got your hands on one of the most famous and powerful rendering 
techniques in the editor, which is called dynamic material instancing. You learned 
how to make a custom material and change its parameters whenever you want.
Procedurally, changing the look of the level is something interesting nowadays, and 
we barely scratched its surface by setting different materials every time we load the 
level. Later on, in Chapter 5, Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game, you will dive 
deeper into the procedural generation approach.

--- Page 92 ---
Advanced Game Content 
Generation with a Fruit 
Chopper Game
As I've mentioned before, physics has always been a huge and massively  
important topic in the process of developing a game, and we will keep using  
it with the majority of the games in this book, as there is no modern game that  
does not run on a physics system.
This is a book about iOS, yes? So, why not discuss the touch inputs, and how to 
recognize a swipe effect a bit more? Unreal Engine does not support the swipe  
action (at this moment, Version 4.3) by default, but there are many ways we can 
recognize it.
What makes players compete nowadays? Score! Let's scratch the surface and see  
how we can add scores to our games and wire the game to show it using UI text.
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• Detect a swipe over a fruit
• Spawn actors during runtime
• Randomly generate objects
• Use different spawn points to give random gameplay
• Load a win or lose screen
• Add a UI text element
• Calculate the score
• Communicate different blueprints

--- Page 93 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 78 ]
• Build a particle system
• Get your hands on the Cascade editor
• Spawn particle emitters when needed
• Build a custom for loop using macros
The project structure
If you are going to browse the included project files, then you will find that they 
were made with Unreal Editor 4.30; if you are using a higher version, it might let you 
know that the project will be upgraded to a higher version, which is an irreversible 
step unless you are running your project within a version control system such as Git. 
Just keep that in mind!
For this game sample, I made a blank project template without the starter content. 
I got some photos of real fruit and sliced each picture into two pieces. For example, 
a banana will have three sprites, the full fruit and another two sprites of it splatted. 
The game is a 2D game, but following the same approach with 3D assets will let you 
get the same result. As for the folder structure, you will find the following contents:
• The blueprints folder: This contains all of the blueprints (regardless of types)
• The levels folder: This holds three levels, which are the game itself and 
another two small levels for the win and lose states
• The materials folder: This contains only one material that will be used for 
the particle system
• The particles folder: This contains one sample of the particle system that will 
be used as an effect for the chopping
• The sprites folder: This is the home for all of the textures and sprites you 
will need.
Importing the assets
In case you decided to start working from scratch with the provided assets (or maybe 
with your own unique assets), you will find a folder called 
fruitsResources with two 
other subfolders containing this chapter's files. The most important folder is the png 
folder, which contains all of the images after cutting them into pieces in Photoshop. 
Feel free to check the 
*.psd file or the sourceImages folder for the sources I found 
using Google.
Select all of the images inside the png folder and then drag-and-drop them inside the 
Content Browser window of your Unreal editor.

--- Page 94 ---
Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
The images will look very strange and will not appear to have any sort of 
transparency, but they do in fact!
Select all of the images inside Content Browser and then right-click and select 
Configure For Sprites (or Configure for Retro Sprites for a later version of the 
editor). With this choice, Content Browser will start treating the imported texture 
assets. These assets will be used to build and construct sprites, and after this step, 
you will see them correctly with some transparency.


--- Page 95 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 80 ]
Select all of them again (if they are not already selected) and right-click on them 
again, but this time, pick Create Sprite. This will create a copy of each asset, but 
make sure the new ones are 2D sprites that can be used with Paper2D (the 2D  
system inside Unreal Engine).
Note that the ones framed in red are normal texture assets, but the ones framed in 
blue/cyan with a white background are sprites.
An overview of blueprints
Before you start, you must keep in mind that most of the blueprints run the same logic.
• Apple, banana, kiwi, and watermelon: All of the fruits are the same; in fact, I 
made the banana blueprint first and then duplicated it several times, changed 
the sprites to use different fruit textures, and finally, renamed them. So you 
can follow the same approach for a faster creation process. A fruit blueprint 
contains the logic to get touched by the player, chop the fruit into two pieces, 
show some particles, and finally, send a call to add the score.

--- Page 96 ---
Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
• bomb: The player must have something to make the gameplay harder. 
Something to kill him/her. The bomb has almost the same construction  
and logic as the fruits, except for one part. When it is touched, it shows the 
player a lose screen rather than processing a chop and a score addition.
• fruitsGame: Here rests all of the logic for the gameplay. Inside this blueprint is 
all of the logic to instantiate the fruits and bombs in a random way in random 
positions. Also, it contains the UI for the score and the calculations to add 
scores or show the player a win or lose state.
• winScreen: This is a small blueprint having a camera and the text telling the 
player that he/she won. It runs in its own level file.
• loseScreen: This is the same as the winScreen blueprint, but it runs in a 
different level file and shows a different text message to the player.
• fruitChopperMode: This is a game mode, which is necessary for any Unreal 
game/level as discussed earlier in Chapter 3, Creating a Brick Breaking Game.
• fruitChopperPlayerController: This is a placeholder player controller to be 
used with the fruitChopperMode game mode blueprint class type. This can 
also be used to enable some mouse and touch events.
The gameplay mechanic
As mentioned in the previous game, which explains the mechanism of the gameplay 
loop, it will be better for you to work from scratch to understand the logic you got 
with the book. With that said, let's break down the gameplay logic:
1. Once the game starts, the fruitsGame blueprint will reset the score to  
zero and update its UI text. It will then start picking a random value for  
the fruits and the positions to be instantiated. It will then start shooting  
the fruits/bombs to the player.
2. The fruitsGame blueprint sets the rendering camera to the one we want.
3. The process of shooting fruits was set to shoot 70 fruits in all per level.  
You can change this, of course, but it is better to keep it in such a rage  
to kill the boredom of the long levels and gameplay sessions.
4. The shooting process contains a custom for loop, which you will learn 
to create. For this loop, you have to wait 0.7 seconds each time a loop is 
completed. After that, a random fruit blueprint is picked and a random  
point to shoot the next fruit/bomb is selected.

--- Page 97 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 82 ]
5. Each fruit will be moved by the physics component, and whenever the player 
touches it, it will add two sprites (chopped pieces) and destroy the full fruit 
sprite. It will then spawn the particles in the fruit's current position, and 
finally, search for fruitsGame and call its AddScore function to add the new 
score to the UI. However, if the player hits a bomb blueprint, it will call the 
OpenLevel function and open the lose level.
6. During Event Tick of fruitsGame, it will be looking forward to see if the 
player hit 50 in the playerScore variable; if yes, the game will show the  
win level.
The game levels
With the same method you already know, you will be creating 3 levels in this 
chapter. So, via the File menu and the New Level option, you will add three new 
levels. The first one for the gameplay itself, which I named base in my case, and 
the other two levels which will hold the game end screens. One of them I named 
lose and the other one, win. These two will be displayed based on the player's 
progression. Keep all of them empty at the moment until you figure out the 
blueprints you are going to use.
Building the particles
To make everything ready foe the game logic, I prefer building a quick particle 
system sample that will be displayed whenever the player correctly touches a fruit 
object. Building a particle system involves different steps starting with building a 
material for the particles, building the particles themselves and finally, spawning  
the particles. Let's start with the two main steps first and leave the spawning step 
until we reach part in the gameplay logic.
Building the material
Add a new material to Content Browser and name it particlesMaterial, then 
double click to open the material editor. Select its base node and set Blend Mode 
to Translucent and Shading Model to Unlit. With these two options, you will find 
some of the inputs the material has disabled as we will not need them with a typical 
particle material.

--- Page 98 ---
Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
Now you can add the RadialGradientExponential node to your material grid, which 
will be responsible for showing a radial gradient shape (small particle shape) in the 
shaded surface.
Also, add a Particle Color node, which will hold the color of the particles (you will 
be able to change it later per instance). Now as you need to connect color to the 
material Emissive Color and alpha to the Opacity material input, you will need 
to add a Multiply node to multiply the RadialGradientExponential value to the 
Particle Color node values and display a correctly shaded particle at the end.


--- Page 99 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 84 ]
Building the particle system
To add a new particle system in the editor, you can just right-click inside your Content 
Browser and press Particle System. And it will add one directly! Name it (in my case, 
it is called choppingParticles) and then double-click on it to open the particle system 
editor (Cascade).
The Cascade editor is divided into four parts:
1. Emitters: This area holds your emitters. The powerful thing inside Unreal 
particles is that a particle system can have as many emitters as you want  
with different shapes and attributes.
2. It starts with one emitter which will be enough to make a sample for  
this game.
3. Viewport: This is a real-time view of your particle system, so you can check 
your progress as you go. You don't have to run in a game mode to check it!
4. Details: This is a dynamic sensitive area, where its content will change 
according to your current selected node, emitter, or option.
5. Curve Editor: Sometimes, entering the values will be better using curves 
rather than float numbers.
Emitter should be one entity, but in fact, each part of the emitter is a whole new 
world with its own list of options to be tweaked. You can also add many other 
unique options to control the particle behaviors.
 


--- Page 100 ---
Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
Keep in mind that working with particle systems requires an artist more than a 
programmer or coder. The only changes I made for the particle system was changing 
Material in the Required section to the one we made in the previous point. Set the 
Use Local Space to true in the Required section too, to force the particles emitter to 
update in the local space.
From the Initial Size section, I changed the Max and Min values to 20.0 rather than 
25.0 as it fits more fruits.
Also, in the Initial Velocity section, I changed all of the Z values to negative rather 
than positive to force the particle to move down and not up.
Finally, I added a curve using the small curve button in the Color Over Life section. 
As the section name implies, that curve will be used to adjust the color over a lifetime. 
By changing the first and last points of each color curve, I was able to set its color to 
yellow with some sort of opacity.
Feel free to keep changing the values as the entire value name implies what they 
are and what they are going to affect. Also, feel free to add more than one emitter 
to generate more complex particle systems, but be aware that you are building for 
mobile devices, and particles need to be optimized!
Building the blueprints
Now is the time to start building the underlying logic for each blueprint, to have a 
gameplay logic that connects all of the game components together.
Player controller
You may have wondered why we are going to make this player controller. The answer 
is simple, to enable the ability to detect the swipe event (actually what looks like a 
swipe, not an actual swipe).
Right-click in your Content Browser, add a new blueprint, and select its base class to 
be Player Controller. I named it fruitChopperPlayerController. After adding a new 
blueprint, don't forget to submit it to the correct slot in the Game Mode blueprint 
that you make in each game.

--- Page 101 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 86 ]
Double-click on the newly created blueprint and from the Defaults tab, adjust the 
value of Mouse Interface to enable clicks and touches. Now the blueprints will be 
able to handle those events.
Fruits blueprints
I mentioned before that all of the fruits share the same logic, so in this step, I'll be 
showing you how to build one of the fruits, and then you can easily reconstruct or 
duplicate the rest of the fruits blueprints within a few seconds.
As we discussed how to build a multicomponent blueprint in Chapter 3, Creating a Brick 
Breaking Game, you need to make the fruit actor blueprint out of three components: 
the Projectile Movement component, the Sphere component as a collider, and the 
PaperSprite component, which will hold the art asset for the fruit. However, keep in 
mind that this time the Projectile Movement component should follow gravity, so 
make sure that Projectile Gravity Scale is set to 1.0.
On Event Begin Play, you need to define that this blueprint can get even swipe 
inputs, so you need to add the Enable Input node and connect it to the Get Player 
Controller node. And since the game has only one player, you can leave Player 
Index set to 0 as it means the first player in the player array.


--- Page 102 ---
Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
To interface a touch, get over the fruit (swipe); it is a little tricky. As the engine does 
not have swipe functionality right now, all we need is to just detect the moment 
when a finger moves over a fruit. So we will calculate it as a touch enter event by 
using the node OnInputTouchEnter or EventTouchEnter on later editor builds and 
set FingerIndex to Touch 1 from the enum of touches.
If you were not able to find the enum of touches node, that means you are running a 
higher editor build. In that case, the easiest way to get a similar result is by looking 
for a node called Equal(Byte), which is usually inside the Byte section of the Math 
node. This will give the same result but using numbers directly instead of enums.
With this connection, perform the next step if the player has swiped over  
the current blueprint (which must have a collider and physics) with one finger.  
Then, you can add Custom Event and call it Process Chopping, and connect its  
call to OnInputTouchEnter and that emulates a successful swipe.


--- Page 103 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 88 ]
After calling Process Chopping, it is time to add to the score. If you haven't made a 
fruitsGame blueprint yet, go ahead and build an empty one with an empty Custom 
Event called Add Score, so that you can manage its call. Alternatively, you can add 
this part later when you finish adding the fruitsGame blueprint. There are so many 
ways to communicate between blueprints, and those ways are used according to the 
blueprint types. And as we are going to communicate between two normal blueprints 
that are based on the actor's class, the best way to do this is by searching and casting.
1. First, let's add a new variable of the type fruitsGame_C, which is the 
fruitsGame blueprint you have already made and left almost empty.  
Name it fruitsGameManager.
2. Then, you can use the Get All Actors Of Class node to look for all  
of the available actors of the selected Actor Class in the current level.  
Then, do a small ForEachLoop between them, and finally, run Cast  
To fruitsGame and apply the found one into the fruitsGameManager  
variable you created earlier.
3. Finally, call the AddScore function from the fruitsGameManager variable 
(which is the blueprint we found while using Get All Actors Of Class).
The Process Chopping function/event will be divided into two main parts. The first 
part is responsible for generating random and rotation positions to add the two new 
parts of the fruit based on the fruit's current position. The other part is responsible 
for adding the new sprites and destroying the full fruit sprite. Force the blueprint to 
stop receiving new inputs, so that we can hit a fruit once.

--- Page 104 ---
Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
Using Get Relative Location to PaperSprite of the fruit, you can get its location. 
Then, using the returned data, you can generate new positions or rotations to the 
newly chopped sprites that you'll add. Make sure to use the Random Float in Range, 
Make Rot, Vector+Vector, and Make Transform nodes to construct randomization 
logic in your own style.
I forced the chopped pieces to be in almost the same positions (10 units to the left 
and right of the old sprite) and gave them a random rotation between 100 and -100.
The last part of the fruit blueprint is adding and destroying the newly chopped parts. 
Using the node Add PaperSpriteComponent, you can add a new sprite. So using it 
twice will cause you to add two new sprites. Don't forget to set each of them to one 
of the two chopped pieces. Also, using the Spawn Emitter at Location node will 
allow you to drop a particle system emitter. Using self and Get Actor Location is  
a good idea to spawn the current position of the fruit.

--- Page 105 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 90 ]
Then, using Destroy Component and adding PaperSprite to its target will destroy 
the full fruit sprite and leave only two chopped pieces. Finally, to stop receiving 
events on this fruit blueprint (as it is already calculated in the score), you need to 
use Unbind all Events from OnInputTouchEnter and set the target to the Sphere 
collider (or whatever collider you are using as a physics component to the blueprint) 
and you will not receive any events again!
Now you can duplicate the blueprint to make all of the other fruits, but don't 
forget to change the sprites to the newly made fruit. Also, change the Add 
PaperSpriteComponent value to the correct value for chopped pieces.
Bomb blueprint
Most of the bomb logic is the same as any other fruit. So you can build and construct 
your components hierarchy in the same way. Or you can just duplicate one of the 
fruits and change its sprite to the bomb one.
You can keep only the start function from the old logic of a fruit, which is responsible 
for enabling the inputs. However, delete anything else related to chopping, as there 
will not be any chopping to the bomb.
Finally, you need to call the Open Level node when the player swipes over a bomb 
and sets its value to the lose level as Level Name. So it means that if the player 
swipes over the bomb, then open the lose level, which will contain a lose word.

--- Page 106 ---
Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
Win/lose blueprints
The win or lose blueprint will be used in a separate level file. Both of them have the 
same structure and logic; the only difference is in the text to be shown. So let's show 
you how to make one of them and you can make the other by duplicating it and 
changing the text value.
Create a new empty blueprint and name it winScreen and then add two components 
to it; a camera (orthographic one) and TextRenderer. Try to adjust the text position 
to fit the middle of the camera and then change its text value to a convenient phrase 
like You Win.


--- Page 107 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 92 ]
The last thing, in the blueprint logic, is that you need to set the camera component  
to be the correct one to render using the Set View Target with Blend node and run 
it in the Event Begin Play function with Get Player Controller as Target and keep 
Player Index as 0. Then, use a Delay node to wait for a duration of 2 seconds and 
then call the Open Level node and set LevelName to base, so the player gets into  
the gameplay again after two seconds. So either win or lose, the player sees the 
screen and after two seconds, he can go back to playing again.
Now you can duplicate the blueprint, drop it in the lose level and change the text to 
You Lose and BOOM! You've created the lose screen in a second!
Don't forget to insert a directional light in the game level because the default UI will 
look black without a light source!
LevelLogic fruitsGame blueprint
The construction of the component hierarchy is very simple. You must have the 
Camera component that will render the game. And you need to have a TextRenderer 
that will work as the UI element to show the player score. And finally, you need 
several points in the space to be used as spawn points for the fruits; in my case,  
I made seven points, all of them are of the type Billboard.


--- Page 108 ---
Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
The final look of the blueprint when you drop a copy of it into the base level scene 
should look like this:
Before you start working on the logic part, you need to add several variables to  
be used during the process of building the gameplay logic. So add an int variable, 
call it playerScore. It is to be used as storage for the score value.
Add an integer called instancesAmount to be used as storage for the number of fruits 
that need to be spawned during the level. Add another integer called instancingPoint, 
which will work as a random value for the spawn point to be used for the current 
spawn operation. Another int called fruitID will be randomly changed, and its value 
will be used to randomly pick a fruit or bomb to be spawned. Finally, a location 
variable named tempLocation will be used to store the spawn point.


--- Page 109 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 94 ]
Now the last thing to be added before we start pitching the gameplay logic for this 
blueprint is something called Macro, which is a collapsed graph of nodes that have 
an entry point and exit point designated by tunnel nodes. You can find the add 
Macro button in the same tool bar you use to add a variable. Add a variable and 
name it 
delayedLoop. This one will be a normal for loop but will have a delay time 
before each iteration of the loop.
The easiest way to build it is by adding a normal for loop inside your graph and then 
double-clicking on it to access its Macro. Then, copy all of the components. Next, 
open the delayedLoop macro you made and paste everything. The only change you 
need to make is just add a Delay node to it before the Sequence node and give it a 
value. I found that a Duration value of 0.7 is working fine with the fruits shooting.


--- Page 110 ---
Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
Now let's work on the logic. The first thing, as always, is Event Begin Play.
Let's add Set View Target with Blend to it to set the camera view to the current 
blueprint camera. Also, add Get Player Controller with Player Index of 0 to it to  
use the first player in the player's array.
• Reset Score: This is mainly used to set the score in the UI by setting the 
playerScore variable to zero (which is zero by default anyway), and converting 
it into string and applying it to the TextRenderer component using the Set Tex 
node and setting Value to the playerScore converted string.


--- Page 111 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 96 ]
• Randomize the Fruits: This simple function will be called whenever we want 
to set a random value to the fruitID or instancingPoint variables. As both of 
them are int type variables, we will use the node Random Integer in Range 
and set the range for fruitID between 1 and 5 as all of the fruits and bombs 
are five blueprints only. Then set the range for instancingPoint to between  
1 and 7 as I have only seven instances of the billboard components.
• Shoot Some Fruits: The first thing to do is defining how many fruit/
bombs we are going to shoot during this level using the Set node for the 
instancesAmount variable. I set it to 70 as it gives 4 minutes of gameplay 
approximately, which is not a long or short level. Using a 
for loop (the 
custom one we made which has the delay inside its logic) and adding the 
instancesAmount variable as its Last Index will guarantee us the game will 
fire the shot even for fruits with the same amount we defined. For loops 
are the best! Then call a custom event called pickTheRandomSpawnPoint, 
which I'll break down in a moment, but for now, this function is responsible 
for picking a spawn point out of the seven we have and using it for the 
current spawning operation.

--- Page 112 ---
Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
Finally, start executing several compare loops to check the random fruitID  
value. And according to the value, the blueprint will be spawning a different  
fruit blueprint using the SpawnActor node using tempLocation (we set its  
value in the pickTheRandomSpawnPoint function) as its spawn location.
Don't forget to assign a different fruit class to the Class value of the SpawnActor node. 
And note that I picked the number 5 of fruitID to represent the bomb actor blueprint.


--- Page 113 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 98 ]
The pickTheRandomSpawnPoint event starts with a call to the randomizeTheFruits 
function, which was made to give a random fruitID and instancingPoint. Then, 
start to compare the variable instancingPoint to different values, and according to 
the compared value, we choose one of the billboard components positions to be the 
spawn point.
Then, by getting the location for the billboard point by the Get World Location 
node, we can get the value and store it to the tempLocation variable to be used  
in the rest of the spawning operation with the node Spawn Actor.
Now let's add the function that will be used to add the score to the layer. Remember 
you may have already added this function but it is empty. As advised in the process 
of creating a fruit blueprint, you may already have the addScore node type of 
custom event now.
Add a custom event and call it 
addScore if you haven't yet. Using the 
Integer+Integer node and applying the playerScore variable as one of its inputs and 
the value of 1 to the other input, you always get the value of 1 added to the latest 
score. By connecting the output of this calculation to a Set node of the playerScore 
variable and applying the result as a string to the TextRenderer node SetText, the 
score will be added and shown at the same time in the game UI.

--- Page 114 ---
Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
With the logic of showing a lose screen added to the bomb logic, we only have one 
case to break the game loop, which is the losing case. Now, it is time to add the logic 
for a win case.
By comparing the playerScore variable to 50 (the maximum for this level is 50 
points) inside Event Tick, we can do whatever we want when the player hits 50.  
So using the Open Level node and setting its Level Name to the win level, we will 
be loading the win level once the player scores 50.


--- Page 115 ---
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game
[ 100 ]
And now we have a full and complete game loop. The game starts and keeps running. 
If the player hits a bomb, it loads a lose screen and then waits for 2 seconds and takes 
them back into the game. If the player is skilled enough to avoid the bomb, once his 
score becomes 50, a win screen is loaded, which waits for 2 seconds, and then loads  
the game level again. And so on!
One last small note is that if you are still using the same version as I am, which is  
UE 4.3, you will not be able to see particles in the game. Don't panic! It is a known 
issue with the orthographic camera; if you switched the game camera to perspective, 
you'll be able to see the particles. This issue has been reported and it might be fixed 
with Version 4.5 or 4.6 as 4.4 is already out now, and it is not addressed it.
Summary
After you finished building your second iOS game with Unreal Engine, you probably 
started to feel at home inside the editor, started guessing and picking some new stuff 
that I never mentioned in this book, and became more familiar with the engine while 
building actual games.
Finishing this game gives you the chance to dig deeper into the editor's unique and 
powerful windows, such as the Cascade window for particles editing.
Also, you worked on building another material but with different properties and 
exploring a different shading mode than in the previous chapter.
Building your own for loop/macro was something very unique and you will start 
feeling its power when you start building more complex logic and projects.
Giving feedback to the user either with a UI score text or by displaying a different 
screen is something required nowadays within any successful game, and now you 
know how to do it.
Now it is time to build an even more complex game, with some collectables, basic 
enemies, and animations. If you feel that you already understand this chapter 100 
percent, then you can start the next chapter; if not, then it is recommended that you 
go through this chapter once more, as the next game will be based on the knowledge 
you received in this chapter and Chapter 3, Creating a Brick Breaking Game.

--- Page 116 ---
Building an Exciting Endless 
Runner Game
Have you owned an iOS device? Or any other smartphone? If so, it means you 
have played at least five endless runner games. At the moment, the runners' genre 
is becoming a remarkable thing that distinguishes the smartphone devices from 
any other gaming platform out there. So learning how to make a runner game is 
something very important when it comes to learning about iOS game development 
with Unreal Engine. As the engine is well made and highly optimized, you will see 
how easy it will be to make a runner using Unreal Engine 4.x for iOS.
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• Implement 2D sprite animations
• Learn about the basic tap controller
• Use the Character Controller class
• Build endless level logic
• Understand the importance of collectables
• Perform advanced communications between blueprints
• Pool the scene objects for better performance

--- Page 117 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 102 ]
The project structure
If you are going to see the already finished project that comes with this book, then 
you will find that it was made with Unreal Editor 4.30. If you are using a higher 
version, it might ask you that the project will be upgraded to a higher version,  
which is an undoable step. Just keep that in mind!
Since this game should have some sort of animation, I managed to build a character 
with a running animation, and also some items for the environment. Feel free to use 
your own handmade assets, or use the assets that come with this chapter's code or 
any other educational purposes. This chapter's code folder structure contains the 
following:
• The Animations folder: This contains two of the Paper2D flipbook animations.
• The Blueprints folder: This contains all of the blueprints (regardless of type).
• The gameScene folder: This holds  only one level, which has the game in it.
• The Materials folder: This only contains one material which will be used for 
the font of the UI.
• The Shapes folder: This is the home for the basic 3D shapes that were  
used to block the level.
• The Sprites folder: This is the home for all of the textures and sprites.  
It contains the main textures and the generated sprites.
Importing the assets
In case you decide to start working with the provided assets from scratch  
(or maybe with your own unique assets), with this chapter's files you will find  
a folder called 
pngAssets with one other subfolder and a few other PNG files  
inside the main directory.
Select all of the images inside the png folder and then drag and drop them inside 
the Content Browser window of your Unreal Editor as discussed in Chapter 4, 
Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game, and keep going in the 
same process of converting those texture images into Paper2D sprites to be used in 
the game. Textures can be used only to show an object surface while displaying a 
material, but sprites can be used as independent flat objects.

--- Page 118 ---
Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
Building the animated sprites
Right-click inside Content Browser. Choose the Sprite Flipbook type from within 
the Animation submenu and you'll be able to add an empty animated sprite to your 
project directory.
Double-click on this new asset to open its proper animation editor, which looks like 
(and is actually) a very simple and easy-to-use editor.
To keep the animations as simple as possible, I managed to build only two:
• Idle animation: This will be displayed when the player is in the air
• Running animation: This will be displayed as long as the player is on  
the ground

--- Page 119 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 104 ]
By selecting all of the frames from the Sprites folder and dragging them into the 
lower-left corner of the animation editor, you can place them into this animated 
sprite. Now you'll be able to see a live view of the frames playing.
As these animations have been made in 24 FPS (every second of animation is made 
of 24 
*.png images), you'll need to adjust this property inside the right panel of the 
animation editor. Also, this panel will show you the total number of frames this 
sprite is made of (12 frames).
The other animated sprite (the flying/idling one) is very simple, as you can pick one 
frame only and put it inside a new animated sprite. As the character should not do 
too many actions while flying in the air, a one frame animation will get the job done. 
I picked frame number 3 as both of the legs were straight!

--- Page 120 ---
Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
An overview of blueprints
As the game has only four blueprints, which sounds like a small number for  
such a game, all of them build the logic behind this complex endless game type.  
In fact, only two blueprints do all of the game logic and the other two were made  
for organization purposes. The following are the four blueprints:
• runnerMode: This is the Game Mode blueprint type for this game, and as 
mentioned earlier, it is very important to have different game modes per 
level or per game.
• levelLayout: This is an Actor blueprint type and it contains the level 
construction, the laser beams, the collectables, the UI, and the logic for the 
endless running, and score calculations.
• madScientist: This is from a Character blueprint type, which contains the 
animated sprites and the logic for the input and collisions with the laser 
beams and collectables.
• madScientistController: This is from a Player Controller blueprint type, 
which was necessary to work with the Character blueprint and to enable the 
mouse/touch events.
The gameplay mechanics
As mentioned with the previous game in Chapter 4, Advanced Game Content Generation 
with a Fruit Chopper Game instead of explaining the mechanism of the gameplay loop 
it will be better for you to work from scratch or to understand the current logic you 
got with the book. With that said, let's break down the gameplay logic:
1. Once the game starts and as long as the score is less than 100; the levelLayout 
blueprint will keep moving the Blocks transform towards the left to give 
the appearance of a running level. Once the Blocks transform reaches its 
endpoint (completes showing the last block) the levelLayout blueprint will 
reset the position of the Blocks transform and show the collectables, to start 
displaying the level continually again.
2. The madScientist blueprint, which is the player, will start receiving the 
inputs from the touchscreen or the keyboard/mouse. As long as the player 
is running on the ground, the animated sprite will display a running loop 
animation; otherwise, it will display the idle animation. If the player hits a 
collectable item, it will force this collectable item to disappear and then add 
one point to the score by calling its function in the levelLayout blueprint. 
However, if the player hits a laser beam, it will restart the level.

--- Page 121 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 106 ]
Building the blueprints
As mentioned with the previous game in Chapter 4, Advanced Game Content Generation 
with a Fruit Chopper Game, explaining the mechanism of the gameplay loop, it will be 
better for you to work from scratch or understand the current logic you got with the 
book. With that said, let's breakdown the gameplay logic:
• madScientistController: Build a new blueprint of type Player Controller and 
set all of its Mouse Interface options to True, because as mentioned earlier in 
Chapter 2, Methods and Tools to Create Your Games, we will be using the mouse 
events to simulate touch events.
• madScientist: Build a new Character class blueprint and you will find that it 
has several components by default:
The components under the character class are as follows:
 ° CharacterMovement: This is the component responsible for all of the 
movement and physics of the character. Feel free to explore the vast 
number of variables inside this component, but the default values 
will work best for this example.

--- Page 122 ---
Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
 ° CapsuleComponent: This is the Capsule collider that works with the 
movement component as the main body mass.
 ° Arrow Component: This is a simple component to define the 
direction the player is facing.
 ° Mesh: This is the component that should hold the player mesh.  
And as we don't have a 3D mesh for the player (the game is 2D),  
you can keep this mesh component as it is (empty) or you can  
delete it if you wish.
You will need to add a Paper Flipbook component and pick the running 
animation to be the default animation for it. So you get the player sprite 
displayed. You might need to scale it down to 0.4 as the sprite was made  
in HD resolution. Or you can scale up Capsule Component. Do as you like. 
Also, rotating it by 90 degrees on the Z-axis is a good way to have it facing  
in the right direction.


--- Page 123 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 108 ]
• runnerMode: Build a Game Mode class type and assign it to the level as 
usual to host the level mode. However, since we have a Character type class 
to control the player this time, you will be assigning it to the Default Pawn 
Class option, and keeping all of the other variables as before.
To make sure this one is working properly, you will need to insert a Player 
Start actor into the scene.
The way it works is that when the level starts, as long as Player Start is in the 
scene, it will spawn the player class (the Character class) that you used as the 
default pawn class inside the active game mode.

--- Page 124 ---
Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
• levelLayout: This blueprint is very similar to the one you made in Chapter 
3, Creating a Brick Breaking Game. So you will be adding a camera, four walls 
to block the level layout, a UI text to host the score, and several transform 
points (Billboard) to work as the parent for the collectables and laser beams 
(the level components). One thing you want to make sure is that the level 
is built on blocks; each block is a parent for several sprites. And all of those 
blocks are children of one giant transform called Blocks (the one we will 
move during the gameplay).
• Don't forget to add the collectable tag to all of the collectables, and the laser 
tag to all of the laser beams. Also, mark Collision Presets as OverlapAll for 
both of them (collectables and laser objects). I made only four blocks, but you 
can make as many blocks as you wish, and keep in mind that more blocks 
will give more variations to the game!


--- Page 125 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 110 ]
Building the logic
As you may have noticed while building the blueprints, the only two blueprints that 
can possibly hold logic were the Character type blueprint called madScientist and 
the Actor type blueprint called levelLayout. The first one will hold the logic for the 
controller and anything related to the player, while the second will hold the logic for 
the level movement/generation of collectables and score updating.
• On Event Begin Play, I will be using View Target With Blend to set the 
current camera view as the main camera for this level.
• Then, add a custom event called addScore to be the one that will control the 
Collectables Score variable of type int that holds the score result. Next, use 
the resultant final score to be displayed by the UI Score text object using the 
Set Text node and pass the Collectables Score value as a string using the Int 
to String conversion node.

--- Page 126 ---
Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
• Now on the Tick event, which takes place in every frame, we will be 
checking whether the Collectables Score value is less than 100 or not. 
Because if the value is more than 100, I'll consider the player victorious and 
then play the level again using the Open Level node (or show a win screen 
as in Chapter 4, Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game). 
However, if the player's score is still less than 100, it means the level should 
keep running by checking whether the Blocks parent transform Relative 
Location on the Y-axis is more than -3400 (which is the full loop of the four 
blocks the level is made of).


--- Page 127 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 112 ]
• However, if Relative Location on the y axis is less than -3400, it means that 
the level is finished and I need to reset the position to the default one (which 
was 0 on the Y-axis), show all of the collectables again using a custom event 
called Show Collectables, and finally, start moving the level again using 
Add Relative Location and adding a small value to the Y-axis. I managed to 
make a float variable for this small value and called it Runner Speed because 
changing this value will change the overall speed of the level, and it can be 
used later for game design purposes to increase the speed over time or over 
the player's performance.
However, if Relative Location on the y axis value is not less, it means  
the camera is still showing new parts to the player, so I keep using Add 
Relative Location to move the Blocks transform object.
• The Show Collectables event is very simple, as I used a reference to all of 
the collectables I have in the level and applied a node called Set Visibility 
to them and marked its New Visibility variable to True. Now I make sure 
that when the level starts to loop, it will reset the visibility of the collected 
items to show them again and again make them available to be collected. 
(The pooling theory for better performance in Chapter 8, iOS Debugging and 
Optimization). We can also use a 
for loop during runtime to look for those 
collectables and reset them, but having a reference for them before starting 
the level is a faster way than looking for them during runtime.

--- Page 128 ---
Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
• Using the Space Bar actions and the Input Touch actions is the easiest way 
to set up a controller for the game quickly. As the game does not require  
on screen joysticks, or for the player to tap on a specific area, both of those 
functions will work fine to simulate the player pressing or tapping the screen. 
And as we are using the Character class to control the player's character, we 
have direct access to a function called Jump, which will cause the player to 
jump with the specified force in the Movement component.


--- Page 129 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 114 ]
• On Event Tick, we can check every frame to know whether the Character 
Movement component of the Character class is moving on the ground,  
and using the returned Boolean value to control whether we will display  
a running animation or in air idle animation. Using the Set Flipbook node, 
we can easily control which animation is displayed for which Target flipbook 
animated component.
• To be able to detect overlap events with the other components of other 
actors (the collectables and laser are components of the levelLayout actor 
blueprint), you will use the OnComponentBeginOverlap node, which is 
meant to detect the overlap of other actors or components with the current 
component, that is, the CapsuleComponent in this case.
• I used two Branch nodes (if statements) to detect whether the overlap was 
with Component Has Tag of collectable or Component Has Tag of laser. 
And based on the result, I execute several steps. If Component Has Tag of 
laser, I will use an Open Level node to reopen the level again, or in other 
words, restart the level (you can also show a lose screen as we did in  
Chapter 4, Advanced Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game).
However, if OnComponentBeginOverlap has overlapped with 
Component Has Tag of collectable, then I'll set the visibility of the  
other component (the collectable) to False (to hide it. I don't like the  
idea of destroying an instantiating object as it is never a good idea for  
game performance; we call it Pooling.)

--- Page 130 ---
Chapter 5
[ 115 ]
• After hiding the collectable item, it is time to add points to the score in order 
to reward the player. There is a custom event called Add Score inside the 
levelLayout blueprint, which is responsible for adding the score, so to be 
able to call this blueprint, we have to search for it first and then give the call.
• Using Get All Actors Of Class, we can get a reference to all of the actor 
classes inside the current level. And as we use the levelLayout class one time 
only inside the level, it will return an array of one element only. By casting a 
variable called Level Manager, we can save that returned reference and then 
call the Add Score function on it.


--- Page 131 ---
Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game
[ 116 ]
• Now if you drop the levelLayout blueprint inside the level view, and tweak 
the position of the Player Start element, you have a fully functional endless 
runner level. Click on Play or deploy to a device, it's up to you.
Pushing the boundaries
Now the game looks like a normal runner, but you can still add other game design 
elements to make the game more fun and give it more user interaction. For example, 
you can add sound effects or particles as we explained in the previous chapters, or  
add some more obstacle types, animated ones or animated laser beams. Alternatively, 
you can add more collectable types and power ups. Or maybe you can force the level 
to shuffle between the blocks and never show them in the same order. Maybe you  
can add a small missions system to force the player to achieve some missions and  
tasks from his gameplay. There are so many game design ideas you can use, but  
game design is a different topic than the target of this book.

--- Page 132 ---
Chapter 5
[ 117 ]
Summary
While building your third iOS game with Unreal Engine, you got involved with 
lots of new stuff. As you started to build 2D animations, you got familiar with the 
Paper2D flipbook animation editor. Also, you started to use the Character class, 
which is one of those amazing and powerful features of Unreal Engine. All games 
have player/character controllers, and getting your hands on this class will save you 
lots of time in the future from writing custom classes or building custom controller 
logic. The character class comes with an engine that is very powerful and optimized.
Also, you got rough ideas about how to make a pooling system to keep reusing  
items or objects in the scene rather than destroying them and instantiating new  
ones during runtime.
Now, after perfectly understanding the player controller and the collectables,  
it is time to make even more complex games. In the next chapter, you will be 
working in an advanced way with the player controller, collectables, basic  
enemies, and projectiles.

--- Page 134 ---
Designing an  
Advanced Game
Want to make even more complex games? Want to have a more complex controller 
and not just a tap all over the screen? What about a platformer? Move, navigate, 
jump, and fire some bullets to kill enemies.
In this chapter, you will be running through the process of building a platformer 
level with a more advanced player controller with touch interface inputs, more 
complex actors, and new components.
By the end of this chapter you will be able to:
• Use the 2D colliders
• Use the touch interface to add on-screen buttons
• Add some enemies and make them responsive
• Add projectiles on runtime as bullets
• Use an actor as a component
• Randomly spawn enemy types
• Pass custom inputs into custom events
The project structure
If you are going to use the already finished project that comes with the book, then 
you will find that it was made with the Unreal Editor 4.3. If you are using a higher 
version, it might ask you to upgrade the project to a higher version, which is an 
irreversible step. Just keep this in mind!

--- Page 135 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 120 ]
You encountered the main character of this game in the last chapter, but there are 
also some new items for the environment. Feel free to use your own handmade 
assets or use the assets that come with this example for the chapter or any other 
educational purpose. This chapter's folder structure contains the following:
• The Blueprints folder: This contains all of the blueprints used to build  
this game logic
• The Flipbooks folder: This contains all five flipbook animations used in  
the game
• The Frames folder: This contains all of the textures and sprites used for  
the animations, the background, and the environment items.
• The Maps folder: This holds one level, which is the game.
• The Materials folder: This contains one material which is used with the  
level blocking.
• The StarterContent folder: This is the home for the basic 3D shapes that  
you might need to use.
• The UIButtons folder: This contains the textures used to build the  
touch interface.
Importing the assets
In case you decide to start working from scratch with the provided assets (or maybe 
with your own unique assets), with this chapter's files you will find a folder called 
pngAssets with other subfolders that are named with the proper asset or animation 
name with PNG files inside them.
Select all of the images inside the png folder and then drag and drop them inside the 
Content Browser window in your Unreal Editor as discussed in Chapter 4, Advanced 
Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game.
Keep on converting those texture images into Paper2D sprites to be used in the game 
as textures can only be used to show an object surface while displaying a material, 
but sprites can be used as independent flat objects.
Building the animated sprites
After right-clicking inside the Content Browser window you can choose the Sprite 
Flipbook type from within the Animation submenu to be able to add an empty 
animated sprite to your project directory.

--- Page 136 ---
Chapter 6
[ 121 ]
Double-click on this new asset to open the sprites animation editor, which is a very 
simple and easy-to-use editor.
To keep the animations as simple as possible, I built only five of them:
• enemyGreen: This is the main and only animation for the green type  
of enemy creature.
• enemyRed: This is the main and only animation for the red type of  
enemy creature.
• scientistIdle: This is the idle animation for the player character that  
will be used while there are no inputs.
• scientistShoot: This is the animation that will be used when the player 
presses the fire button.
• scientistWalk: As in the previous chapter, this animation will be used  
while there is a horizontal movement input.
By selecting all of the frames from the Sprites folder and dragging them, as we did  
in Chapter 5, Building an Exciting Endless Runner Game, into the lower-left corner of the 
animation editor, you can place them into this animated sprite and you'll be able to 
see a live view of the frames playing.
Some of these animations have been made at 24 FPS, and others at 15 FPS; you'll 
need to adjust this property in the right-hand side panel of the animation editor,  
so remember to ask your animator about the frame rate used.
The blueprints
As this game is at a relatively larger scale than all of the other games we have created 
up until now, you will find that the game contains even more blueprints. With this 
project, you will find nine blueprints, which are defined as follows:
• bullet: This is a blueprint based on the actor class that represents a bullet 
projectile to be spawned when the player shoots an enemy.
• crateBox: This is a blueprint based on the actor class that represents the 
collectable items all over the level to fill the player's weapon with ammo.
• enemyGreen: This is a blueprint based on the actor class that has a basic 
logic for the enemy to navigate through the level.
• enemyRed: This is a blueprint based on the actor class that has a basic  
logic for the enemy with a different flipbook animation to navigate  
through the level.

--- Page 137 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 122 ]
• gameInputs: This is a blueprint based on the touch interface class that holds 
the necessary on-screen buttons.
• mainChar: This is a blueprint based on the Character class that contains the 
player controller.
• shootingGameMode: This is a blueprint based on the Game Mode class that 
is used as the game mode for this level.
• spawnPoint: This is a blueprint based on the actor class that has a basic logic 
for spawning of random enemies.
• uiText: This is a blueprint based on the actor class that has only the UI  
text. As this game have more text to display, I decided to split it into its  
own blueprint.
The gameplay mechanic
As mentioned in the previous game, explaining the mechanism of the gameplay loop 
will be better for you if you plan to work from scratch or to understand the current 
logic you've got with the book. With this said, let's break down the gameplay logic:
1. Once the game starts, all of the spawnPoint blueprints in the scene will  
keep spawning random enemy types as long as the player never reaches  
the targeted score or is still alive.
2. The mainChar blueprint will be able to receive inputs from the keyboard  
and the touch screen as long as the game is running. Once the player hits 
jump, this action will force the player controller to jump, while hitting fire 
will force him to stop and shoot some bullet blueprints.
3. While shooting, the player's amount of ammo keeps decreasing while the 
score increases if the bullets hit some enemies, and both are displayed 
through the uiText blueprint.
4. Finally, if the player falls through a gap or touches an enemy, the level will 
restart; whereas, if the player hits a cratebox blueprint, it will add 10 extra 
bullets to the amount of ammo the player has.

--- Page 138 ---
Chapter 6
[ 123 ]
Building the blueprints
As almost everything taking place in the game should be made using the blueprints, 
it is time to start working on the blueprints based on their importance for the correct 
construction of the gameplay loop:
gameInputs
As briefly described earlier, this blueprint will be responsible for the integration of 
the touch interface. It should be the first blueprint made, so that we can make use of 
this input with the player. The touch interface, by default, copies its events from a 
keyboard or controller binding; this means that we have to figure out some inputs  
in Project Settings for the keyboard, and then we will map it to the touch interface.
As you can see, I've added a Jump, Fire, and MoveRight movement to Input. Feel 
free to assign any buttons to these movements that make you happy on the controller. 
However, remember that these bindings will be used with the touch interface.

--- Page 139 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 124 ]
Now that you can create a touch interface blueprint; right-click on your Content 
Browser window, select Miscellaneous, and finally select Touch Interface Setup. 
This will add a purple-colored blueprint icon. Feel free to name it whatever you 
want, in my case it is called gameInputs.
Now when you double-click on the newly created blueprint, it will open the touch 
interface setup window. Although the window looks very simple, it is very powerful.
You just need to select an image to represent the button, define its size, and its position, 
and finally define which buttons it should simulate. In the first case, I chose the 
buttonFire art asset to simulate the Left Shift or Right Shift button clicks, which were 
introduced in the Input tab of Project Settings as Fire input in Action Mappings. Now 
it is your turn to keep adding buttons and following the same process as my current 
game inputs have. What do you think about adding a pause button?

--- Page 140 ---
Chapter 6
[ 125 ]
Finally, it is time to force these buttons to appear on the screen. Up until this moment, 
the buttons are not displayed or accessible. To achieve this, you need to navigate to 
Project Settings again, select the Input tab, and finally from the Mobile section, you 
need to set the blueprint you made to the Default Touch Interface option.


--- Page 141 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 126 ]
uiText
To show the titles, I used two text components and set one of them to display Ammo 
and the other to display Score.
Then, I added two other text components to display the values themselves, which are 
0 right now.
Finally, I added a directional light as we have done earlier to show the text in the 
scene view.
In the graph view, I've added two integer variables (which are ammo and score) to 
store and control the UI values.
mainChar
The character has the same structure as the player character in Chapter 5, Building an 
Exciting Endless Runner Game, but this time I've added a new Child Actor component 
type rather than putting the UI to the camera. I prefer to show a new way to set the 
UI which is more efficient. Now you can assign the uiText blueprint actor to a child 
component of the mainChar blueprint.

--- Page 142 ---
Chapter 6
[ 127 ]
Also, I've added a billboard component to represent the point from which I'm going 
to spawn the bullet.
Finally, I added a bullet integer variable into the graph to help me store and check 
the current ammo the player has, to prevent the bullets from spawning if the player 
keeps pressing while his ammo is empty.


--- Page 143 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 128 ]
enemyRed
Do you remember how we managed to build our projectile components in the fruits 
game? The same magical component will work efficiently in building these kinds of 
simple enemies.
Using just a projectile component, paper Flipbook, and Sphere collider, I was able 
to build an entire enemy.
Just remember that I've made some tweaks to the projectile component to alter its 
behavior to match what I had in mind. Set initial speed to 120, activate Should 
Bounce, reduce Bounciness to a very low value such as 0.1, disable Friction by 
setting it to 0.0, and finally give it a velocity of 200 on the X-axis as this represents  
the horizontal movement.

--- Page 144 ---
Chapter 6
[ 129 ]
Finally, setting the sphere component to Simulate Generate Hit Events and 
Generate Overlap Events while giving it an enemy tag will give you easy  
access to control its effects on the environment.
With a fully finished enemy in hand, you can now duplicate it to make the 
greenEnemy blueprint, but this time, use the green enemy animations. Later when 
you build a one-enemy logic, it's just a matter of copying and pasting it to the nodes 
to make the other enemy work fine.

--- Page 145 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 130 ]
crateBox
This is the simplest blueprint in the game. It is just a paper2d component with its 
own collider.
It has its physics component set to Simulate Generate Hit Events and Generate 
Overlap Events while having a crate tag.
bullet
This is a typical projectile construction, like the enemy, but this time Projectile 
Gravity Scale has been set to 0.0 to prevent the bullets from falling to the ground 
and the velocity has been set to 400 to force them to move fast.
It still has its physics set to Simulate Generate Hit Events and Generate Overlap 
Events but its tag is set to bullet.

--- Page 146 ---
Chapter 6
[ 131 ]
shootingFGameMode
Now, after getting a player character controller blueprint, you can quickly set up the 
game mode. The only unique option I was setting was the Default Pawn Class to use 
my mainChar blueprint.
spawnPoint
The spawn point is made of just one component, which is a billboard. I added it  
to have a point in space, and nothing more. The only other thing I've added was  
a variable called randomValue, which I'll be using to randomly select to spawn  
a green or red enemy.
Building the logic
Now it is time to put everything together and start building the connections  
between all of the blueprints. In fact, it is easier than it looks like, and with that  
in mind, let's start.

--- Page 147 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 132 ]
uiText
To change the score value, I've added a custom event and called it setScore.  
This custom event will be working on setting the value of the Score variable by 
adding 1 to it using the integer + integer node. The final result of the score value 
will be displayed in the UI using the Set text node. Keep in mind that you can use 
whatever values you want, as long as you are using the add node. This node will  
be working on adding the first passed integer value to the second passed integer.
I wanted to follow a new method to change the value of ammo, which is closer to the 
code environment that I have used over the years. It is called passing parameters. 
Basically, when I called an event or function, I wanted to send the exact new value 
directly to it, and then use it to set the ammo text based on the passed parameter. 
To add this type of parameter passing, I've added a new custom event, called it 
setAmmo, and after selecting the node in the side panel, I've added a new input 
to Inputs, set its type to Integer, and set its name to ammoAmount. Now any call 
to this event will require passing an integer value, otherwise it will use the default 
which, is set to 0 for now.


--- Page 148 ---
Chapter 6
[ 133 ]
Finally, I used the passed ammo value from the AmmoAmount parameter and set it 
as a string to the Set text node, to change the proper UI text.
enemyRed
I've added two rectangles in the scene to represent walls and gave them a wall tag. 
Then, I started using OnComponentHit that is caused by the sphere component of 
the enemy blueprint.


--- Page 149 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 134 ]
We check whether the enemy hit a wall tagged actor with the Actor Has Tag node, or 
another enemy tagged component with the Component Has Tag node. If yes, then 
the enemy changes its movement direction by changing the velocity direction of the 
projectile component and changing scale of sprite between 1 and -1 to emulate a flip.
spawnPoint
Using the Spawn Actor Of Class node on Event Begin Play, I was able to spawn 
enemies. However, to ensure that it is random and lasts for a while, I set a random 
value to the RandomValue variable and based on the resulting value, I pick whether 
to spawn a red or green enemy.


--- Page 150 ---
Chapter 6
[ 135 ]
To ensure that it is sort of a loop, I decided to use a new approach, which is the 
Timeline node. This node controls a value over time. I set its time in its graph to  
1.5 seconds, and never cared about the resulting value as I won't be using it, I just 
made use of the animation duration and forced it to run every time an enemy 
finishes spawning. With this, I get the following sequence:
1. Execute the timeline node.
2. The node finishes running.
3. Randomize the value of the integer.
4. Select an enemy type.
5. Spawn the enemy.
6. Run the timeline node.


--- Page 151 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 136 ]
bullet
As the Delay node is broken for my current version of Unreal Engine, I had to find a 
way to ask the bullet to wait for a while after it is spawned and then destroy itself.
The best and most efficient way to fix the Delay node was using a timeline node  
and setting its duration to 4 seconds. Then, when the animation finished, I called 
Destroy Actor.


--- Page 152 ---
Chapter 6
[ 137 ]
The rest of the calculations of the bullet were done using OnComponentBeingOverlap 
and checking the overlapped components.
If the overlapped component had an enemy tag then I just called Destroy actor to 
destroy the parent actor that holds this component. Finally, I used a quick search 
method such as Get All Actors Of Class to look for the uiText class and called its 
setScore custom event to add 1 to the score and the UI.
mainChar
With a custom event named changeAmmoValue, I started looking for uiTextClass 
using the same Get All Actors Of Class as before and then calling the SetAmmo 
event. However, as we have set up this event in a way that requires it to pass an 
integer value, I passed the value of the local variable bullets to it.


--- Page 153 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 138 ]
By calling changeAmmoValue on Event Begin Play, I was assured that every  
time the level is started, the UI will be updated to the default value of the local 
variable bullets.
Due to the usage of a character-based blueprint, I was able to simply simulate a jump 
by calling the Jump or Stop jump function on the controller when I had to.
To ensure that the player can't just shoot continuously, we check the value of the 
local variable bullets before processing a bullet spawning process. Every time 
the player presses the shoot button, we make sure that the number of bullets 
is more than 0 and then call the shoot event to process a bullet and call the 
changeAmmoValue to reduce the number of bullets.


--- Page 154 ---
Chapter 6
[ 139 ]
The shoot event itself is just using the spawnPoint type of billboard component to 
get a world transform and then using the Spawn Actor of Class node to spawn the 
bullet blueprint.
Then it reduces the total number of the current bullets in the local variable bullets by 
1 using the integer – integer node, and finally plays a shooting sound at the location 
of the spawning.
In case the character controller Event Hit gets hit with a component that has an 
enemy tag, then the level needs to be restarted as the player will die.


--- Page 155 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 140 ]
However, if the Capsule component of the character controller has been overlapped 
with a crate that is a tagged component, then I use Destroy Actor to destroy the 
crate blueprint actor instance, add 10 to the bullet local variable, and call the 
ChangeAmmoValue event to change the value on the uiText blueprint.
Using 2D colliders
Now the only missing thing in this platform is, obviously, the platform itself. As 
you can see, the project has a tiles sprite. It is not an actor, it is a sprite, but it has a 
physics component inside it by default. You can remove, update, or change what it 
looks like.
Double-click on it to get access to the sprites editor, navigate to the top button bar, 
and select the Edit Collision button that will bring you into the collisions mode.


--- Page 156 ---
Chapter 6
[ 141 ]
This will enable a new button on the top bar. Using the newly activated Add 
Polygon button, you can keep adding new polygons to the collision mesh, or  
you can remove by simply hitting Delete on the keyboard.
While editing, you will see that the viewport is updating you in real time, and it will 
feel more like a 3D poly edit application such as Maya or 3DsMax.
Once you're finished, don't forget to make sure of the collision settings, and as this 
sprite will be used as a platform to stand on, you can simply set Collision Preset to 
Block All Dynamics, and Collision Thickness to a high number to make sure no 
assets fall into the background while platforming.


--- Page 157 ---
Designing an Advanced Game
[ 142 ]
Pushing the boundaries
Now, with all of the components of the level, you can simply drag and drop items 
into the scene to construct a level from your imagination. You can add more flavor to 
it; you can start building custom particle systems as discussed in Chapter 4, Advanced 
Game Content Generation with a Fruit Chopper Game; or a win and lose screen as was 
discussed in the same chapter. There is more you can add and, in fact, there is never 
a complete game; whenever you open your project, you will always find something 
new to add to give a better gameplay experience.
Summary
After you finished building your fourth iOS game with Unreal Engine, you have 
learned more about Unreal Engine. It was worth learning how to add custom inputs 
to your custom events, how to use the timeline node, how 2D colliders are optimized 
and why they are the best solution for 2D games, and finally a platformer on an iOS 
device should have virtual controllers that Unreal Engine makes possible using its 
unique and easy to use touch interface.
Now you have made four nice games, and it is time to move beyond the process 
of creating game logic and learning more about the other social and monetization 
features that Unreal Engine 4 provides.

--- Page 158 ---
Monetizing Your Game
Making games for mobile devices has always been tricky. As you might have seen, 
some games charge you money, while other games don't. However, how do those 
people who release their games for free make a revenue?
Monetization has always been an essential topic related to the game industry, mostly 
with mobile games as the mobile market has its own rules and competition. Adding 
ads or in-app purchases is the best way to monetize your game, but keep in mind 
that it has to be done in a way that makes the user like it, not in a way that makes 
them run away from the game.
Another thing to keep in mind is that in earlier releases, the majority of these online 
features were not exposed to the editor, but currently Epic has released UE 4.5, 
which has all the online and social features exposed in the editor, ready to be used. 
So I had to upgrade my system and the whole environment to UE 4.5, XCode 6.1,  
and OS X Yosemite to enjoy the new features and engine optimizations.
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to do the following tasks:
• Show and hide ads
• Create a game profile on iTunes
• Add features to the game profile
• Implement in-app purchases
• Enable, show, and update the leaderboard in the game
• Access the achievements system in the game

--- Page 159 ---
Monetizing Your Game
[ 144 ]
iAd support
Displaying ads in mobile games has always been one of the essential but complex 
topics. However, that was before Unreal Engine started supporting ads (meaning 
that you can add some banners inside your games to gain revenue from them), and 
now it has become much easier. While it is still an experimental feature inside the 
engine, it looks promising anyway. Currently, Epic supports iAd for iOS devices,  
but if you are more interested in integrating other ads services, then you will need  
to contact the provider, work on writing your own wrapper for it, and then compile 
the editor.
To show an ad banner, you just call a node named Show Ad Banner and you'll find 
that it is tagged as EXPERIMENTAL if you are running the older editor version. This 
node has only one option with a checkbox. If the Show on Bottom of Screen option 
is checked, the ad will be displayed at the bottom of the screen, otherwise it will run 
on the top section of the screen. Normally, these are the only two places to show an 
ad unless they are fullscreen ads. So, ensure that you show the ads during a game 
menu screen or even a cut scene.
When it comes to a gameplay session, it is better to hide the ads to avoid the player 
accessing them by mistake. Doing this is even easier. Epic provides two nodes to hide 
an ad banner. The Force Close Ad Banner node will totally close and terminate the 
ad session, and this might cause you to lose some revenue, while using the Hide Ad 
Banner node will work in hiding the banner till you call it again. As mentioned earlier, 
these are tagged as EXPERIMENTAL nodes if you are running an older editor.


--- Page 160 ---
Chapter 7
[ 145 ]
iTunes Connect
You already know that using the iOS developer portal is the way to prepare your iOS 
game for release by building the provisioning profile, certificates, devices list, and 
the bundle ID. Now when the journey of creating a game comes to its end, you have 
to access what is called iTunes Connect.
• By accessing https://itunesconnect.apple.com/, you'll have a dashboard 
that should be hosting your apps, games, charts, reviews, revenue, downloads, 
and everything related to your product in the post-production stages.
• The most important part right now is My Apps, where you will be building 
the first profile for your first ready-to-go game. Because you are using ads, 
In-App Purchases (IAP), leaderboards, or achievements, you need to create 
a setup inside the game profile first. Then, you can keep developing inside 
Unreal Engine. Once you access the My Apps section, you'll find that it is 
mostly empty, so start adding a new app using the plus icon in the top-left 
corner, as you must have an app dashboard to be able to have an app on  
the App Store.


--- Page 161 ---
Monetizing Your Game
[ 146 ]
• Fill in all the provided sections. Use the Name field of the game you are 
willing to use, set the Primary Language, and pick a Bundle ID from the 
ones you've already made in the iOS dev portal. Finally, add a version 
number (in the Version field) to the game and an SKU, which is just 
description text that no one except you will be able to see.
• After adding your app, you'll see its profile, which will contain tons and tons 
of information and requested files. Feel free to keep uploading screenshots 
and videos, writing descriptions, or filling some support information for 
your future players and users. Adding an icon is a good thing to do now.
• The most important thing right now is that you focus on two tabs only:  
the In-App Purchase tab, which is meant to take care of the items you  
are going to sell, and the Game Center tab.


--- Page 162 ---
Chapter 7
[ 147 ]
• Using the In-App Purchase tab, you can set up a product ID to be used in the 
game. Feel free to read more about this part in Apple's documentation to pick 
the correct product types for your game.
• When you open the Game Center tab, you'll find that it focuses on only two 
things: the Leaderboard and Achievements sections. As you can see, it is very 
easy to keep adding items to the lists. Feel free to fill both lists with the items 
that your game needs. However, keep in mind that the names that you'll be 
using and choosing will be needed in the engine to complete the logic.


--- Page 163 ---
Monetizing Your Game
[ 148 ]
Adding in-app purchases
• To make an IAP request in an Unreal Engine game, you will need to add 
a single node called Make An in-App Purchase, assign the current player 
controller to it, and pass Product Identifier as a string from the iTunes 
Connect account. Then, you can make different scenarios based on the  
result. For example, if the player purchases a pack of in-game currency,  
you can add the amount of the currency to the player's profile on success  
or you can display an error message on the UI on failure.
• Also, you can return the IAP information from the output In App Purchase 
Information and then you can break down this information into more detail 
by using the Break InAppPurchaseProductInfo node, which can give you 
different strings that you can use to display some messages to the player.


--- Page 164 ---
Chapter 7
[ 149 ]
• With another node called Read in App Purchase Information, you can 
pass all the product identifiers as an array string, and it will return all the 
information related to them. You can then use this information to display 
some sort of text inside the game store. This is useful if you change some 
information later, as this way you don't have to make an update to the game 
to update the store information. If the store gets its information directly from 
the iTunes Connect identifiers, then it will get the information once you 
change it. Let's say you changed the price of a product; using Read in App 
Purchases Information at the beginning of the game will ensure that the 
most recent test data to be displayed in the game store is returned to you.
Adding leaderboards
A leaderboard, as with any other online feature, is very simple and quick to integrate. 
After adding your leaderboard IDs in iTunes Connect, you will be able to write new 
values and update them for any of those IDs by calling the Write Leaderboard Integer 
node. Usually, passing the Player Controller option is essential for all the online nodes. 
For a leaderboard, you need to assign a value for Stat Name, which is the iTunes 
Connect ID and the integer value you want to send in the Stat Value slot.


--- Page 165 ---
Monetizing Your Game
[ 150 ]
• If you want to display the whole leaderboard of the game to the player, or 
you want to show the Game Center screen of your game to your player, then 
you need to use Show Platform Specific Leaderboard Screen. This is called 
Specific because the same node is used with Android devices to display the 
Google Play leaderboard screen:
• Usually, you save the leaderboard values locally in the device as an integer. 
However, the player will be the only person on earth who will be able to know 
their score as no one else can see it or access it. Let's think about the highest 
score of the player. What if the player used another device (device B) to play 
the game with their account, and then they came back to the first device (device 
A)? Of course, the local score will not match the final score on the Game Center. 
This is the reason that Epic has implemented the Flush Leaderboards node to 
download the leaderboard values and the Read Leaderboard Integer node to 
get the downloaded values. Firing these nodes during the start of the game gets 
you the latest values of the player on the leaderboard, which you can compare 
with the local ones. If it is higher than the local score, then you will need to 
update the local score and then save it.


--- Page 166 ---
Chapter 7
[ 151 ]
Adding achievements
As leaderboards and achievements used to be discussed together as one topic, Epic 
has done their best to make the Achievements process similar to the Leaderboard 
process, which is as follows:
1. Use the Write Achievement Progress node.
2. Assign a value for Achievement Name, which represents the ID in  
iTunes Connect.
3. Pass a Progress value to it if it is a progression achievement.
4. You don't have to use a user tag, but this value will be returned anyway  
on success and on failure.
You can also use a similar node on the leaderboards to display the Game Center 
achievements screen by calling Show Platform Specific Achievements Screen.  
This too is named Specific as it is used with Android to show the Google Play 
Achievements screen.


--- Page 167 ---
Monetizing Your Game
[ 152 ]
As leaderboards have the functionality to download the progress and get its 
values, achievements have similar functionality too. However, as an achievement 
has a progress and description and not just progress (unlike the leaderboard), 
achievements have four nodes. The Cache Achievement node and the Cache 
Achievement Description node both download and cache (save on the device)  
the achievement progress and description. So, if the player has no Internet 
connection and still wants to display the achievements, they still have a chance  
to display it offline with caching.
The Get Cached Achievement Progress and Get Cached Achievement Description 
nodes get the downloaded values and start using them.


--- Page 168 ---
Chapter 7
[ 153 ]
Summary
Now you've got your hands on the how and why to use ads, IAP, leaderboards,  
and achievements, and know how easy the hard stuff becomes when you use  
Unreal Engine to process them.
While you have already got the core elements of monetizing an iOS game, before  
you move forward to the next chapter and start optimizing your game's performance, 
I would suggest you read some articles on the monetization science, as showing ads 
or adding IAP, or even achievements are just the tools and methods to monetize, but 
to make a successful monetization you've got to use these features at certain points 
during the gameplay.

--- Page 170 ---
iOS Debugging  
and Optimization
Debugging has always been a strong topic when it comes to game development. With 
every development, there is a debugging process to help the product's performance 
and push it to the best, make it as bug-free as possible, and remove the performance 
issues. However, when it comes to games and especially mobile games, debugging 
is the number one priority topic as these devices are not usually powerful enough to 
handle some aspects of the game.
By the end of this chapter, you will:
• Learn how to use the editor in different ways to debug your games
• Understand the different ways in which XCode can help in debugging  
your games
• Learn how to optimize the game performance
• Learn how to minimize the game size
Blueprints Live view
What could be better than having a visual representation of the game logic during 
runtime! Using blueprints, you guarantee that when it comes time to find a bug,  
it will be a very quick process.

--- Page 171 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 156 ]
Being able to see the code execution process, which is something that is running 
in the background, but you didn't think about it. If you have a dual screen or even 
if you just have a big screen and you can shrink your window size, try to put the 
viewport alongside the blueprint view. Then by pressing the play button, you will 
see a visual representation with flashing red and yellow lines into and out of the 
nodes that are being executed right now. Like Event Begin Play, when the game 
starts, it shows you the execution of its SET integer node.
Usually, when you have a bug, it is because there is something that has not been 
executed or has been executed in the wrong way or with wrong values. Using this 
method is simple and easy. You can see if a specific node has been executed or not, 
and if it was executed, in which order or with what values.

--- Page 172 ---
Chapter 8
[ 157 ]
Printing messages
Printing messages to the console has always been a quick and easy way to check 
the occurrence of a function or perhaps the changes in a variable over time. Unreal 
Engine has a very advanced Print String node. When you use the node for the first 
time, it appears that it'll be printing the request In String value to the console.
However, if you press the little down arrow at the bottom of the node, it will show 
you more options. These options give you the chance to print this message to the 
console using Print to Log, print to the player game view using Print to Screen, or 
even use both!
The Text Color option is the color of the printed text on the screen. This only works 
if you have selected the Print to Screen option; otherwise it is useless as the console 
always prints messages in one color—black!


--- Page 173 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 158 ]
To be able to see the console/log messages during your development process, the 
best way is to watch it through the Output Log window that you can access from  
the Window panel.
The Output Log screen not only prints messages from your blueprints' logic, but also 
prints messages from the internal engine core. It is also a good place to follow the 
progress of building and packaging a playable version of the game. The Output Log 
screen is a log for anything related to your Unreal Engine project—not only code and 
engine-related stuff, but anything else too. It is always a good place to check for the 
cause of crashes or building and packaging failures.

--- Page 174 ---
Chapter 8
[ 159 ]
The Output Log window has its own tagging system, and any printed line will have 
a tag for itself. For example, a printed message from a Print String node in your 
blueprint will usually start with LogBlueprintUserMessages:.
Breakpoints
As the name implies, a breakpoint is a point where the game will be forced to break 
for a while. If you are from a programming background, then you definitely know 
what breakpoints are.
A breakpoint is something you add to your logic to ask the game/app to pause the 
execution process once it reaches this point. To add a breakpoint to a certain node,  
all that you need to do is right-click on the node itself and choose Add Breakpoint.


--- Page 175 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 160 ]
Once you finish adding the breakpoint, the node will be tagged with the breakpoint 
icon. However, the first time, you'll see that the breakpoint icon looks strange.
The icon shown in the preceding screenshot means that you've successfully added 
the breakpoint to the node. However, it will not be effective until you compile the 
blueprint logic. Once you compile your blueprint, the breakpoint icon will change  
to show the usual red icon.
Now you have a breakpoint in the game that should take place once this Destroy 
Actor node has been called. While running the game, when this node is executed, 
you'll find:
• The game pauses
• The blueprint opens on that node and marks it with giant red arrow
• The app shows the flow input to the current breakpoint node

--- Page 176 ---
Chapter 8
[ 161 ]
Now comes the most interesting part of debugging. By opening the Blueprint 
Debugger window from the Window toolbar, you will have access to the  
Blueprint Debugger.


--- Page 177 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 162 ]
This window gives you a lot of information about the execution of the nodes and 
how long it takes. It also shows you an execution trace for all of the nodes and their 
execution order. It also shows you the nodes tagged by blueprint and you can use 
this window as a quick way to disable or enable breakpoints.


--- Page 178 ---
Chapter 8
[ 163 ]
Once you find the issue, you need to get rid of the breakpoint. All that you need to 
do is right-click on the node again and select Remove Breakpoint.
You can also remove the breakpoint but keep a reference for it. Let's say this node 
was often a cause of different issues and you want to remember that. So you could 
choose Toggle breakpoint and make it nonfunctional, but it will still be marked as a 
breakpoint entity. So once you see it, you'll know that it is a switched off breakpoint 
that is not active right now and you can re-enable it whenever you want.


--- Page 179 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 164 ]
If you have lots of breakpoints, usually while tracking a very serious bug, you'll 
keep adding breakpoints everywhere in all of the blueprints. However, once you 
fix the problem and need to clean your logic of those breakpoints, it does not make 
any sense to open the blueprints one-by-one and manually remove them. That's the 
reason behind adding the Disable All Breakpoints and the Delete All Breakpoints 
options in the Debug menu. Also, once you use Disable All Breakpoints, the Enable 
All Breakpoints option will be enabled to give you the opportunity to reactivate all 
of them again if you want.
XCode tools
As long as you are developing for iOS or OS X, you must use XCode for one task at 
least. Although Unreal Engine can directly give you a running game in your device 
or a final cooked IPA, you can still run the game via XCode.
Any game that is cooked using Unreal Engine either for direct play on the device or 
an IPA as a result of a project generated and compiled by XCode.
To find this autogenerated project, you can just browse your Unreal Engine's project 
directory and find it alongside the Unreal project file. It is usually named with the 
same name.


--- Page 180 ---
Chapter 8
[ 165 ]
When you open this project, you will find it is set to UE4CmdLineRun by default. 
Usually, it will not run once you try to build in your device. So first you need to 
change the scheme to UE4Game – iOS and then choose your connected device  
from the list.
Debug Navigator
To access the debugging tools, you need to click the sixth icon on the left-hand side 
panel icon bar, which usually shows a Show the Debug Navigator tool tip, and this 
will give you direct access to the debugging tools.
Understand that accessing this panel without running a game on the device will 
show you a totally empty panel. You must have a running game on the device to 
start seeing the tools shown here:
The first part called UE4Game has general information about the game. It is not 
much, but it is useful anyway. It gives you the PID value, which is the process ID  
of 601, and the current state of this process, which is obviously Running.

--- Page 181 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 166 ]
The second row of the toolset is the CPU. Accessing it will show you how many 
threads the device is running at the moment, the performance of each thread, and the 
utilization of each running process. Because you are running UE4Game, it will be the 
main focus here; any other running processes on the device will be listed in Other 
Processes. The amount of free CPU capacity will be listed in Free percentage.
The third row is Memory and it looks a lot like the CPU tool; in fact, it works in the 
same way, and the only difference is that the memory tool measures the memory 
capacity in MB.

--- Page 182 ---
Chapter 8
[ 167 ]
The last row is meant for the FPS measurement. FPS is short for frames per second. A 
good game should be running on 60, but since complex games usually can't reach this 
frame rate, 30 is a good frame rate. The highest frame rate is the best and the lowest 
frame time is the best as well, because a low frame time would mean a high frame 
rate. As you can see, the frame rate is 60 and the frame time is 6.0ms, which means 
rendering the frame took 6 milliseconds from the device. This is very fast. Usually,  
its value would be something near 15 to 20 milliseconds for more complex games.


--- Page 183 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 168 ]
Capturing frames
You can also use the Capture OpenGL ES Frame option from the Debug menu, 
which will freeze the game for a while and totally change the content of the Debug 
menu to accommodate the new debugging environment. Finally, it shows you a 
frame debugger that contains all of the draw calls for OpenGL ES where you can see 
the construction and the rendering pipeline of the chosen frame. Also, you can check 
the used texture, shaders, and objects one by one. It is a more advanced tool, but it is 
very useful to use when you want to really understand how a frame gets rendered 
step by step.
From the changed Debug menu, you can go back and forth between the draw calls. 
Once you have finished investigating, you can go to the Debug menu again and 
choose Release OpenGL ES Frame. This will let the game keep running again on  
the device. Keep in mind that these options are available only when you have a  
game running on the device.

--- Page 184 ---
Chapter 8
[ 169 ]
Instruments
Instruments has always been the most famous debugging tool and the most 
famous savior of so many games and apps for iOS and Mac OS X. As long as you 
are building iOS apps from OS X, you must use Instruments to check your game 
performance, memory leaks, allocations, system trace, and lots of other features. 
From the XCode menu, you can choose Instruments from the Open Developer  
Tool submenu.


--- Page 185 ---
iOS Debugging and Optimization
[ 170 ]
Once it is open, you can choose to profile apps from different types of platforms and 
different types of metrics to profile. It is very easy-to-use and handy tool. Its values 
are very easy to read.
Performance optimization
iOS devices and mobiles in general can run games with a high frame rate, but there 
are some disadvantages that you need to take care of to make sure that the game will 
be running at its best frame rate. Here are some points that you need to check while 
working with Unreal games for iOS:
• Try not to use real-time lights and try to use baked lightmaps
• Make sure that you build all of the lighting before building to the device
• Pooling the actors is better than destroying and spawning them
• Don't use post process effects on the camera
• Make sure to have less than 700 draw calls in the camera view
• Use as few materials as possible to get fewer draw calls
• Use as few textures as possible; using atlases is a great way to optimize the 
textures' amount and size
• Square texture (power of two) is the best texture for iOS devices
• The tries count should not be more than 500,000 in the camera view
• Use PrecomputedVisibilityVolumes if your game has lots of 3D meshes
• Try not to use HDR or LDR if possible
• Try no to use lots of masked or translucent materials, as iOS devices are not 
friendly with opaque surfaces
Minimizing the game size
When it comes to packaging a game with an engine like Unreal Engine, there is not 
much that you can do to reduce the final installer file size, as there are so many files, 
headers, and things related to the engine itself that need to be shipped along with the 
game. Still, here are some hints that could help in reducing the final game size:
• Using less textures and game contents will guarantee that you have a smaller 
content folder within the IPA.
• Any unused content must have no reference. For example, if there is a testing 
level and it has testing content, then it needs to be removed from any logic; 
because any content referenced in the game will get cooked into the IPA.

--- Page 186 ---
Chapter 8
[ 171 ]
• Switching the project to C++ is a great way to reduce the size a little  
bit, because you'll be able to disable some of the plugins such as Slate. 
Normally, the project cannot make any assumptions about which plugins 
and libraries you are using.
• Zipping the final IPA file before submitting to the App Store will shrink its 
size a little bit.
• When you make your custom Loading screen and game icon, save them as 
.png files and try to make them as simple as possible and as few as possible.
Summary
Optimizations and bug fixing are a major part of game development; in fact, what 
makes one logic better than another is how bug free it is. What makes a game better 
for a player (regardless of the game design) is how fast the game runs. Now you 
have got your hands on the majority of the tools and techniques the pros use to find 
and fix their bugs, optimize their iOS game performance, and reduce the build size.
With all of that in mind, I would recommend that you go directly to the next chapter 
as you will be using this bug-free optimized game with its small installer file to 
submit it for review to the App Store.

--- Page 188 ---
Publishing
When you have a finished and bug-free game in your hand, you still have one 
more step to be performed before you start working on another game or even take 
a couple of weeks break. This is the step where you start showing your game to the 
players who are waiting out there. It is the publishing and submission step.
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
• Package an IPA from the editor
• Change the game icon and splash screen
• Prepare the requested assets for submission
• Fill in the game information in the game dashboard
• Upload the game IPA to iTunes Connect
• Submit the game for review
Packaging the project
Before you start packaging the project and building the final IPA file, you still have 
one more thing to change in the game. Maybe you don't have to do it in either the 
editor or XCode. It is changing the game icon and splash screen. Unless you want  
the final game to have the default Unreal Engine logo as its icon and splash screen, 
you'll have to change it manually.
You can change it by replacing already built images with new ones. You can change 
these assets per-project or per-Unreal-Engine build. If you are working on a sequel 
and all of the games have to have the same splash screen and the same icon, then you 
don't have to waste your time and replace them every time you make a new chapter 
for your game.

--- Page 189 ---
Publishing
[ 174 ]
In this case, you'll have to replace all of the images in the Users/Shared/
UnrealEngine/4.5/Engine/Build/IOS/Resources/Graphics/ directory, where 
all of the splash screen sizes and icons are present. Changing them in this directory 
means that whenever you start a new project, these will be the ones used for it.  
In the following screenshot, you can see the full directory of the Graphics folder.
As you may have noticed, all the images look the same but each one has a different 
size, and this shows the reality of iOS devices having different screen sizes. Usually 
when you build an iOS game, it is either limited to iPad, iPhone, or both. In all cases, 
every device has different generations with different screen sizes, resolution, and 
types. Ensure that you replace all of the images, but keep their names and the PNG 
format as it is to avoid any errors in compilation.


--- Page 190 ---
Chapter 9
[ 175 ]
However, if you want to change these assets per project and not per engine build, 
which is the usual case, then you have to replace the ones that rest inside your 
project files and not the ones inside the Unreal Engine build. These assets can be 
easily found by browsing to 
/ProjectName/Build/IOS/Resources/Graphics and 
you may notice how easy it is to work with Unreal Engine, as all of the directories  
for your game project are almost the same as the directories for the editor itself.
Now, as you have already finished the only remaining step before the building step, 
you are ready to package the game and get the IPA out of the engine.
As you already made development and distribution provisioning profiles in Chapter 
1, Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal Engine – Installing and Setting Up, anytime 
you made a build, it was running as a development profile, and it was using the 
development provisioning profile. However, to be able to make a final build for App 
Store submission, you have to use the distribution profile. While you have no option 
in choosing which provisioning profile to use, you have the choice of the build type.

--- Page 191 ---
Publishing
[ 176 ]
From the File menu, click on Package Project, then click on Build Configuration, 
and finally mark it as Shipping. You can also do it from Packaging Settings inside 
Project Settings. However, the File menu is an easy way to do it.
With everything in its correct place and the build type set to Shipping, now you 
have to fasten your seat belt, select Package Project, and select the target as iOS.


--- Page 192 ---
Chapter 9
[ 177 ]
It may prompt you to ask for the packaging directory. Choosing the same directory 
as the project is useful.
Now, the editor will show a small indicator loading and writing some information at 
the bottom right of the screen. You have to wait until the process ends.


--- Page 193 ---
Publishing
[ 178 ]
To track the progress of the packaging process, you can click the underlined Show 
Output Log text in order to display a console with a printed message for each 
step taking place. It will show you many messages on what exactly is done at each 
moment during the building process, and will also report errors or warnings while 
building. If everything goes right, all of the files are in the correct locations, and the 
certificates and provisioning profiles are correct and valid, then the project will finish 
correctly and will show you a success message at the bottom right of the screen and 
also in the output log.
Now, if you browse to the project directory, you'll find that a new folder named IOS 
has been created. This is the folder created by the packaging process and it will hold 
whatever you have built so far, as long as you chose the root of the project directory 
as a building place.


--- Page 194 ---
Chapter 9
[ 179 ]
Keep in mind that the final IPA name will not affect the game's name in the App 
Store, as the name has already been defined in the Store itself in iTunes Connect 
while building the profiles for it.
The name that the packaging process will give you will be a mix of the project  
name, the target, and the build type. In my case, it was ppBricksBreaking-IOS-
Shipping.ipa.
Editing the game profile
Starting from this point, all of the future publishing work will take place on  
the iTunes Connect website. As you already have a profile for your game from 
Chapter 7, Monetizing Your Game, you will be able to add some social stuff such as the 
Leaderboard and Achievements. Now you need to access this game profile again.
In the first part called App Video Preview and Screenshots, you can add five 
screenshots alongside a video for each targeted device. As you can see, Apple defines 
these sections by screen size, not by the device generation name. Make sure to upload 
the screenshots with their correct dimensions to avoid any further problems.


--- Page 195 ---
Publishing
[ 180 ]
All of the other sections are about filling in your information, website, support e-mail, 
game description, the game category, the game rating, and choose to enable or disable 
some features such as Game Center. You need to write these things carefully as it will 
be the interface of your game on the App Store. Keep in mind that you can come here 
later and make any changes you want. Also, don't forget that any icon will be rejected 
if it is less than 1024*1024 pixels.
Now, on the top-right corner of the App dashboard page, the Save button will be 
highlighted, as you have already made some changes. It is a good idea to save right 
now. However, as you can see, the Submit for Review button is still grayed out, which 
means that there is something missing that has made the app ineligible for submission.
After saving, you'll find that the new icon has been added next to the app title, and 
also that there is some text indicating the current status of the app, which is currently 
Prepare for Submission.
Uploading and submiting for review
As discussed in Chapter 1, Prepare to Make Unreal Games with Unreal Engine – Installing 
and Setting Up, we will use a free app called Application Loader. Now comes the 
time to use it. In fact, it is a very easy and straightforward process!

--- Page 196 ---
Chapter 9
[ 181 ]
Application Loader is a free application that is meant to upload the final application 
binaries to Apple and ensure that the binary file fits their standards and is almost 
free of any bugs or errors.
After running the application loader, the first screen you see will probably be the one 
asking for your Apple developer account sign in.
After adding the correct developer e-mail account, the application loader will ask 
you if you want to deliver your app or add new in-app purchases. Select Deliver 
Your App and click on the Choose button.


--- Page 197 ---
Publishing
[ 182 ]
Now you need to select the final IPA file you've already packaged with Unreal Editor.
Once you have selected a valid file, Application Loader will check the binary file and 
get some information from it based on a real game profile that you've already created 
in your iTunes Connect. Application Loader will display this information as a step 
to ensure that you are uploading the correct app to the correct iTunes profile. By 
comparing the app icon, name, SKU (which is a different type of unique ID for the 
game), and ID, I'm sure that this is the correct binary for my game.

--- Page 198 ---
Chapter 9
[ 183 ]
The whole process will take less than 10 minutes, and you can click on the Activity 
button to show a more detailed uploading process.


--- Page 199 ---
Publishing
[ 184 ]
Once the uploading process is completed, you can go back to iTunes Connect 
and check the Build section of the game profile to find that a new version has 
been added. The version number you can see here is the number you used inside 
The Unreal Project. You can add as many builds as you wish, you can choose 
between them, and you can delete some of them. One thing to keep in mind is that 
Application Loader will refuse to upload two versions using the same number.
Now, the Submit for Review button has been enabled and is ready to be used. If you 
are sure about all of the information, and sure that the game binary file is fine and 
that no more features need to be added or replaced inside your game, click on the 
Submit for Review button.
The Submit for Review button will keep loading for a while, which indicates that 
work is in progress. It will not directly take you to the next screen, so don't panic  
or think that the webpage is broken or will not be loaded. Although it might take  
a long time, don't worry; it will finish this checking process at some point.
Finally, the submission process will take you to a final screen with some questions. I've 
answered them as No because my game has not used third parties or IDFA (which is 
the identifier for advertisers). These questions may change in the future due to changes 
that Apple might make in their methodology, but for now, there are just two questions 
related to the third-part content and the use of IDFA. Answer the questions with the 
correct answers that fit your game/app and finally click on Submit.

--- Page 200 ---
Chapter 9
[ 185 ]
When the submission screen finishes loading, you will be taken back to the game 
dashboard screen, and you will see that the status has been changed to Waiting  
For Review.
As you can see, I've changed my version number from 1.0 to 1.2; this is because while 
preparing this book, I came across a new rule by Apple, according to which I had to 
use XCode 5.1.1 to compile the Unreal project, as 5.0 was not valid anymore. It has 
now become essential to use at least Xcode 5.1.1 and Application Loader 3.0. So in 
the future, ensure that you check the Build section of your game dashboard before 
uploading the binaries, as the rules may have changed.


--- Page 201 ---
Publishing
[ 186 ]
After a few days, you will receive an e-mail from Apple saying that the game has 
passed the review, and is ready to appear on the store for the public. So if you are 
sure about your game, just show it to everyone. Until this moment, with the green 
light icon, it is approved, but still hidden from the store.
Summary
By now, you must understand what the exact steps required are to prepare for the 
final shipping package, and how to change the game's splash screen and icon. You also 
learned about most of the options on the game's dashboard of iTunes Connect, and 
how to upload an IPA using Application Loader and submit it for review on Apple's 
website. With all of this information in your pocket, I suggest you keep packaging all 
of the other examples you made along the course of this book and keep submitting 
your games to Apple; share them with your friends to show them the epic work you 
have done with Unreal Engine 4.x, and don't forget to recommend this book to them.

--- Page 202 ---
Nodes Database
In previous chapters, you've been using lots of nodes to build up the game logic.  
Of course, the nodes you used with the examples in this book are not all of the nodes 
that Unreal Engine 4 contains, but they were the most essential ones you needed 
to build the game logic. Some of these nodes may be changed in the future while 
others may be removed. However, as of now you will have this small appendix as 
a reference for the most common nodes used during this book. You can come here 
anytime to learn about the usage of a specific node you found while looking into the 
project files and blueprints. The most common nodes are:
• Event Begin Play: Anything connected to this node will start executing itself 
once the game starts, or once the actor is spawned into the world.
• Event Tick: Anything connected to this node will be executed in every frame 
as long as the game is running.
• InputTouch: This is an event node, which means that it fires itself when the 
event takes place. As the name implies, it will be fired when a touch action 
takes place. You can execute some functions when the touch is pressed or 
released, and this can be done using data such as the touch location or the 
finger index
• Event Begin Input Touch: This is an event node that fires itself when a touch 
action is initiated, and can only pass the finger index.

--- Page 203 ---
Nodes Database
[ 188 ]
• Event End Input Touch: This is an event node that fires itself when a touch 
action ends, and can only pass the finger index.
• Event Touch Enter: This is an event node that fires itself when a touch input 
enters a collision area, such as the start of overlapping of a collider. This can 
only pass the finger index.
• Event Touch Leave: This is an event node that fires itself when a touch input 
leaves a collision area, such as completion of overlapping of a collider. This 
can only pass the finger index.
• Get Dynamic Material Instance: If the current mesh has a dynamic material, 
then accessing it with this node is the best way to start changing some values 
(such as color) of this material. The node needs a target mesh and source 
material as inputs.
• Set Vector Parameter Value: This is a node that is usually used with 
dynamic materials to set its parameter. It needs a target, parameter name, 
and a value to be set to.
• Custom Event: This is an empty node that represents a set of procedurals to 
be called. You can imagine it to be a function.
• For Loop: This is a typical loop to repeat some procedure until a finish point. 
It requires a first index to start with and a last index to stop when it hits.
• For Loop With Break: This is a typical loop but it has an extra input as a 
reason to break the loop.
• Branch: This is the match of an if statement in programming languages.  
It takes an input and checks whether it is True or False.
• Random Integer in Range: This is a mathematical node that will give a 
random integer value between a 
Min and Max value that you can enter.
• Make Transform: This is a node that will build a transform by using three 
inputs as Vector3 values. These three inputs are location, rotation, and scale.
• Make Vector: This is a node that works on building a Vector3 value by using 
three deferent float values as X, Y, and Z.
• Break Vector: This is a node that works on breaking a Vector3 value into 
three deferent float values as X, Y, and Z.
• Set Material: This is a node that works on setting a material into a target 
mesh.
• Set Visibility: This works on changing the current visibility state of the 
Target actor into the New Visibility state.
• Play Sound at Location: This plays a sound input at the location input.

--- Page 204 ---
Appendix
[ 189 ]
• Component Has Tag: This is a comparison node to check whether the Target 
component has the Tag input value.
• Actor Has Tag: This is a comparison node to check whether the Target actor 
has the Tag input value.
• Print String: This is a node that prints the In String value either to the 
screen, to the log, or both using the Text color input as the text color.
• Get Actor Location: This is the node that gets the Target actor location as  
a Vector3 value.
• Open Level: This is a node that loads a new level that has LevelName as  
an input.
• Get Player Controller: This is a node which returns the player controller 
that uses Input Player Index. It is heavily used to return the current player, 
which is usually number 0 for a single player.
• Get Hit Result Under Finger by Channel: This gets the Hit result as an 
output of a finger press using the current player controller as a target. It has 
some advanced inputs such as the trace channel, which is better to be set to 
Visibility to check the visible object only.
• Break Hit Result: Any hit with the physics system has a result, which can be 
very useful to do lots of things. Any hit result can provide Location, Normal, 
Impact Point, Impact Normal, Physics Material, Hit Actor, Hit Component, 
and Hit Bone Name.
• Enable Input: This enables the input functionality of the current actor.
• Get AllActors Of Class: This is a search node that will look inside the current 
scene for all Actor class types.
• Add PaperSpriteComponent: This adds a new paper sprite component into 
the Target actor using the relative transform.
• Spawn Emitter at Location: This is a spawn node that instantiates an emitter 
template input into a Location input with a Rotation input using the Auto 
Destroy option.
• Destroy Component: This is a node that totally removes the Target 
component from the current/selected actor.
• Destroy Actor: This is a node that will totally remove the Target actor from 
the scene.
• Delay: This is a node that will work as a pause for the execution of the logic 
for a duration, and then keep executing using the 
Complete event.

--- Page 205 ---
Nodes Database
[ 190 ]
• Set Text: This node usually works with the UI elements to set the text of the 
Target component into the Value input.
• Set Flipbook: This is a node meant to change the current animation clip of a 
Target animated flipbook into the New Flipbook value.

--- Page 206 ---
Index
Symbols
2D colliders
using, for advanced game  140, 141
A
achievements
adding  151, 152
advanced game
2D colliders, using  140, 141
animated sprites, building  120, 121
assets, importing  120
blueprints  121, 122
designing  119
extending  142
gameplay mechanics  122
logic, building  131
project structure  119, 120
animated sprites
building, for advanced game  120, 121
building, for Endless Runner  
Game  103, 104
animations, Endless Runner Game
idle animation  103
running animation  103
App ID
App ID Description  20
App ID Prefix  20
App ID Suffix  20
App Services  20
generating  20
Application Loader
about  181
used, for submitting iOS game  
for review  181-186
used, for uploading iOS game  181-186
using  16
App Store
game profile, preparing  16
assets
importing, for advanced game  120
B
Blender3D
using, for 3D assets  15
blueprints
about  25, 26
advantages  28
class blueprint  27
level blueprint  27
using  155, 156
blueprints, advanced game
building  123
bullet  121, 130
crateBox  121, 130
enemyGreen  121
enemyRed  121, 128, 129
gameInputs  122-125
mainChar  122, 126
, 127
shootingGameMode  122, 131
spawnPoint  122, 131
uiText  122, 126
blueprints, Brick Breaking Game
ball blueprint, building  50, 60-62
bricksBreakingMode  50
building  50, 55
gameplay mechanics  51
layout blueprint, building  56-60
levelLayout  50
new level, starting  51

--- Page 207 ---
[ 192 ]
platform blueprint, building  50, 63
blueprints editor
about  25
tips and tricks  37, 38
blueprints, Endless Runner Game
building  106
levelLayout blueprint, building  105, 109
madScientist blueprint, building  105, 106
madScientistController blueprint,  
building  105, 106
runnerMode blueprint, building  105, 108
blueprints, Fruit Chopper Game
apple  80
banana  80
bomb blueprint, building  81, 90
building  85
fruitChopperMode  81
fruitChopperPlayerController  81
fruits blueprints, building  86-89
fruitsGame  81
kiwi  80
LevelLogic fruitsGame blueprint,  
building  92-100
loseScreen  81
player controller, building  85
watermelon  80
win/lose blueprints, building  91, 92
winScreen  81
breakpoints
about  159
adding  159-164
Brick Breaking Game
blueprints, building  50, 55
components, building  55
game mode, building  52
graphs, building  63-65
logic, adding  63-65
material, building  53-55
project structure  50
C
certificates
generating  18, 19
class blueprint  27
components, ball blueprint
projectile movement, adding  61
projectile movement, setting  62
sphere, adding  60
components, layout blueprint
adding  57
billboard, adding  60
camera, adding  57
camera, setting  57
static mesh, adding  58
static mesh, setting  58
D
debugging  155
Debug Navigator
using  165-167
devices
adding  20
Name option  20
UDID option  20
E
emissive material  53
Endless Runner Game
animated sprites, building  103, 104
assets, importing  102
blueprints  105
developing  101
extending  116
folder structure  102
gameplay mechanics  105
logic, building  110-116
project structure  102
F
frame per second (FPS)  167
frames
capturing  168
Fruit Chopper Game
assets, importing  78-80
blueprints  80
folder structure  78
game levels  82
gameplay mechanics  81, 82
particles, building  82
project structure  78

--- Page 208 ---
[ 193 ]
G
game
monetizing  143
game profile
App ID, generating  20
certificates, generating  18, 19
editing  179, 180
preparing, on App Store  16
game provisioning profile
building  39
new project, creating  40
*.plist file, editing  45
project settings, editing  41-44
setting up  39, 40
game size
minimizing  170
GitHub version
used, for accessing Unreal Engine  11-15
graphs, Brick Breaking Game
ball blueprint graph, creating  70-72
building  63-65
layout blueprint graph, creating  66-70
platform blueprint graph, creating  72-75
I
iAd support  144
In-App Purchases (IAP)
about  145
adding  148, 149
Inkscape
using, for 2D assets  15
Instruments
about  169
using  169, 170
iOS game
developing, Unreal Engine used  7
performance optimization  170
submitting for review, Application  
Loader used  181-186
uploading, Application Loader  
used  181-186
iOS project
building  45
launching  46
packaging  46, 47, 173-179
pipeline  39
iTools
using, for Windows  16
iTunes
using, for Mac  16
iTunes Connect  145-147
K
Kismet  25
L
leaderboards
adding  149, 150
level blueprint  27
logic, advanced game
building  131
building, for bullet  
136
building, for enemyRed  133, 134
building, for mainChar  137-140
building, for spawnPoint  134, 135
building, for uiText  132, 133
logic, platform blueprint graph
Actor location, defining  75
touch state, adding  74
M
material
building, for Brick Breaking Game  53-55
emissive material  53
messages
printing  157-159
monetization  143
N
nodes
about  29, 187
Actor Has Tag  189
Add PaperSpriteComponent  189
Branch  188
Break Hit Result  189
Break Vector  188
Cache Achievements  33
Cache Achievements Description  33
Component Has Tag  189
Custom Event  188

--- Page 209 ---
[ 194 ]
Delay  189
Destroy Actor  189
Destroy Component  189
Enable Input  189
Event Begin Input Touch  31, 187
Event Begin Play  187
Event End Input Touch  31, 188
Event Hit  30
Event Tick  187
Event Touch Enter  31, 188
Event Touch Leave  31, 188
EXPERIMENTAL Close Ad Banner  36
EXPERIMENTAL Show Ad Banner  35
Flush Leaderboards  32
For Loop  188
For Loop With Break  188
Get Actor Location  189
Get AllActors Of Class  189
Get Cached Achievements Description  34
Get Cached Achievements Progress  34
Get Dynamic Material Instance  188
Get Hit Result Under Finger  
by Channel  189
Get Input Motion State  36
Get Player Controller  189
InputTouch  30, 187
iOS/Mobile-only nodes  30-36
Make Transform  188
Make Vector  188
Open Level  189
Play Sound at Location  188
Print String  29, 189
Random Integer in Range  188
Read Leaderboard Integer  32
Set Flipbook  190
Set Material  188
Set Text  190
Set Vector Parameter Value  188
Set Visibility  188
Show Platform Specific Achievements 
Screen  35
Show Platform Specific Leaderboard  
Screen  33
Spawn Emitter at Location  189
Write Achievement Progress  34
Write Leaderboard Integer  32
P
particles, Fruit Chopper Game
building  82
material, building  82
particle system, building  84, 85
Projectile component  49
provisioning profiles
generating  21, 22
R
required tools
Application Loader  16
Blender3D, for 3D assets  15
Inkscape, for 2D assets  15
iTools, for Windows  16
iTunes, for Mac  16
preparing  15
XCode 5.1  15
U
Unreal Engine
about  7
accessing, with GitHub version  11-15
blueprints  25, 26
building  9
downloading, directly  9, 10
prerequisites  8
prerequisites, for non-Mac OS computer  8
setting up  8
used, for developing iOS games  7
Unreal Script  25
X
XCode
using  164, 165
XCode 5.1
using  15

--- Page 210 ---
Thank you for buying  
Learning Unreal® Engine iOS 
Game Development
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book, Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management, in April 2004, and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution-based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern yet unique publishing company that focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website at 
www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to 
author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would 
like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, then please contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

--- Page 211 ---
Unreal Development Kit Game 
Programming with UnrealScript 
[Video]
ISBN: 978-1-84969-632-6            Duration: 02:23 hrs
Kick-start your career in game development with 
UnrealScript and the UDK 
1. Step-by-step guide on how to set up the UDK 
and create a game with UnrealScript.
2. Explore core UnrealScript features  
and configurations.
3. Ideal for newcomers to UnrealScript.
iOS 7 Game Development
ISBN: 978-1-78355-157-6            Paperback: 120 pages
Develop powerful, engaging games with ready-to-use 
utilities from Sprite Kit
1. Pen your own endless runner game using 
Apple's new Sprite Kit framework.
2. Enhance your user experience with easy-to-use 
animations and particle effects using Xcode 5.
3. Utilize particle systems and create custom 
particle effects.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

--- Page 212 ---
UnrealScript Game Programming 
Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84969-556-5             Paperback: 272 pages
Discover how you can augment your game 
development with the power of UnrealScript
1. Create a truly unique experience within UDK 
using a series of powerful recipes to augment 
your content.
2. Discover how you can utilize the advanced 
functionality offered by the Unreal Engine  
with UnrealScript.
3. Learn how to harness the built-in AI in UDK  
to its full potential.
iPhone Game Blueprints
ISBN: 978-1-84969-026-3            Paperback: 358 pages
Develop amazing games, visual charts, plots, and 
graphics for your iPhone
1. Seven step by step game projects  
for you to build.
2. Cover all aspects from graphics to  
game ergonomics.
3. Tips and tricks for all of your  
iPhone programming.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles