--- Page 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
.NET MAUI
Projects
A guide to building applications for
Windows, macOS, Android, and iOS
Sivaraj Ambat
www.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 4 ---
First Edition 2025
Copyright © BPB Publications, India
ISBN: 978-93-65899-924
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any
form or by any means or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission
of the publisher with the exception to the program listings which may be entered, stored and executed
in a computer system, but they can not be reproduced by the means of publication, photocopy,
recording, or by any electronic and mechanical means.
LIMITS OF LIABILITY AND DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY
The information contained in this book is true to correct and the best of author’s and publisher’s
knowledge. The author has made every effort to ensure the accuracy of these publications, but
publisher cannot be held responsible for any loss or damage arising from any information in this
book.
All trademarks referred to in the book are acknowledged as properties of their respective owners but
BPB Publications cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
www.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 5 ---
Dedicated to
My family
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 6 ---
About the Author
Sivaraj Ambat is a seasoned software professional with expertise in web,
mobile and desktop app development, cloud technologies, and artificial
intelligence. With over 30 years of experience across multiple industries, he
has worked in sectors such as instrumentation, industrial automation,
software development, and education.
Sivaraj began his career working on industrial embedded systems and
robotics, focusing on automation solutions in the textile industry before
transitioning into software development and training. Over the years, he has
built extensive experience in developing software across a range of
platforms, including web, mobile and desktop. He possesses deep expertise
in a variety of programming languages, frameworks, and tools, and
consistently keeps up with the latest industry trends and technological
advancements.
A recipient of the 2016 Top 20 Emerging Leaders award from Training
Magazine and Senior Fellowship Award from his previous employer,
Sivaraj has made significant contributions to the field of software
development. He has also authored and reviewed several books and articles
and frequently delivers talks on a wide range of topics related to software
development.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
About the Reviewer
Aleksei Starkov is a software engineer specializing in .NET, Xamarin, and
.NET MAUI technologies, with extensive experience in building advanced
cross-platform mobile applications and frameworks. Over the years, Aleksei
has worked with a diverse range of companies, from Agile startups to large-
scale enterprises, contributing to innovative, high-quality projects with
millions of users that leverage modern technologies.
Aleksei is also the author of Learning .NET MAUI: Unlock the Potential of
.NET MAUI for Cross-Platform App Development, a comprehensive
resource designed to help developers understand .NET MAUI and learn
how to develop modern cross-platform production-oriented applications. As
a technical reviewer, Aleksei brings his extensive real-world expertise and
keen attention to detail, offering valuable insights to help ensure technical
content is accurate, practical, and useful for its audience.
With his deep knowledge of cross-platform development and his passion for
empowering developers, Aleksei continues to make a meaningful impact in
the field of mobile application development. His contributions help both
individuals and teams to unlock the full potential of .NET MAUI.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
Acknowledgement
I want to express my heartfelt gratitude to everyone who played a role in
the completion of this book.
First and foremost, I am deeply thankful to my family, friends, and
colleagues at DXC Technology for their unwavering support and
encouragement throughout this journey. Their encouragement and belief in
me have been a constant source of motivation.
I also want to express my deep gratitude to my managers for their
unwavering encouragement and support. Vidya Gothe, Director - Global
Talent Transformation at DXC Technology, has been an incredible source of
motivation, always encouraging and supporting me to develop my technical
expertise further and inspiring me to pursue writing. I would also like to
thank Prabhakar Kanagarajan, Director - Applications at DXC Technology,
whose mentorship and encouragement played a valuable role in shaping my
skills and providing invaluable guidance throughout my professional
journey. Their belief in my abilities has been a constant source of strength
and has contributed greatly to the successful completion of this book.
I am profoundly grateful to BPB Publications for their expertise and support
in bringing this book to life. Their guidance was invaluable in navigating
the complexities of the publishing process.
My sincere appreciation goes to the reviewers, technical experts, and
editors who provided valuable feedback and helped refine the manuscript.
Their insights and suggestions have significantly enhanced the quality of
the book.
Lastly, I want to thank the readers who have shown interest in this book.
Your support and enthusiasm mean a great deal to me.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 9 ---
Preface
In today's rapidly advancing technological landscape, the ability to develop
cross-platform applications is becoming increasingly important for
developers. .NET MAUI Projects is designed to introduce you to the world
of cross-platform app development using .NET MAUI, a powerful and
flexible framework for building mobile applications at no cost.
This book is structured to guide you step-by-step, assuming no prior
knowledge of .NET MAUI or mobile app development. The first five
chapters lay the foundation, beginning with an introduction to cross-
platform app development and .NET MAUI, followed by setting up your
development environment. We then dive into the core programming
languages used in .NET MAUI development - C# and XAML - ensuring
that you are equipped with the necessary skills to develop apps.
The remaining five chapters focus on hands-on projects, providing detailed,
step-by-step guidance on how to build real-world applications. By the end
of these projects, you will not only have developed several apps but you
will also be well-equipped to create your own cross-platform applications
and take your skills to the next level.
This book is written for absolute beginners, whether you are a student, a
working professional seeking to learn this skill, or simply an enthusiast
eager to learn. Through clear explanations, practical examples, and
accessible language, I aim to make .NET MAUI app development
approachable and engaging.
I hope that this book will serve as a valuable tool in your journey to
becoming proficient in building cross-platform mobile applications. With
the skills gained from these chapters, you will be well on your way to
creating versatile apps for Windows, MacOS, Android and iOS, opening up
new opportunities in the world of app development.

--- Page 10 ---
Chapter 1: Introduction to Cross-platform Application Development -
In this chapter, we will discuss the basics of cross-platform application
development. We will start by understanding the need for cross-platform
app development and the problems that it helps address. We will discuss the
advantages and limitations of cross-platform app development and why it
has emerged as a preferred choice for many developers and organizations,
examining its advantages, such as code reusability, faster time-to-market,
and broader audience reach. Then, we will explore various cross-platform
development frameworks and tools available for developers. We will also
discuss the impact of emerging technologies on cross-platform app
development and its future.
Whether you are a seasoned developer seeking to broaden your skill set or a
newcomer eager to explore the possibilities of cross-platform development,
this chapter offers a comprehensive roadmap to navigate the exciting and
ever-evolving landscape of multi-platform application development.
Chapter 2: Overview of .NET MAUI - In this chapter, we will begin with
a high-level overview of .NET MAUI, exploring its underlying architecture
and the key principles that drive its functionality. We will gain an
understanding of how .NET MAUI works under the hood (meaning we are
going to be looking at the internal workings of .NET MAUI to understand
how it functions at an architectural level) and how it empowers developers
to leverage its capabilities effectively.
Additionally, we will cover a whirlwind tour of the common application
programming interfaces (APIs) provided by .NET MAUI, which help
developers create dynamic and responsive cross-platform UIs. This chapter
will provide a foundation for the readers to understand the flexibility and
versatility inherent in .NET MAUI, which will help while developing apps
in the later chapters of this book.
Furthermore, we will look into the evolution of .NET MAUI from its
predecessor, Xamarin. Understanding this transition is crucial for
developers looking to migrate their existing Xamarin apps to .NET MAUI
seamlessly. We will look into the migration process and the benefits of
transitioning to .NET MAUI.

--- Page 11 ---
Chapter 3: Development Environment Setup - In this chapter, we will
also guide you through configuring your development environment to
ensure optimal results. Since .NET MAUI is primarily focused on cross-
platform development, our main focus will be on setting up your
development environment on the Windows operating system. We will also
discuss the additional steps required for configuring your Android
development environment, which is crucial for testing and deployment.
Chapter 4: A Crash Course in C# - This chapter gives a concise and
focused introduction to C# designed to equip beginners with the essential
knowledge needed to follow the chapters ahead in this book. While this
chapter does not provide an exhaustive coverage of the C# language, it
serves as a vital primer to ensure that readers, especially those new to C#
programming, can comfortably follow and comprehend subsequent
discussions. For those seeking in-depth exploration, this publisher offers
comprehensive books dedicated to the topic in detail.
Chapter 5: Introduction to XAML - In a .NET MAUI app, the user
interface (UI) is basically constructed as a tree of objects. The UI is
generally created using a markup language instead of C#. This markup
language is an XML-based language and is called eXtensible Application
Markup Language (XAML). The markup defines the .NET MAUI classes
and property values. At runtime, the XAML is parsed and the objects are
instantiated and initialized.
Chapter 6: Project-1: Color Picker - In this chapter, we will develop a
Color Picker using the concepts we have learned so far. A Color Picker, also
called RGB Color Mixer, is an essential tool for graphic designers, artists,
and developers who need to select colors for their application. It is found in
various graphic design software, image editing applications, and web
development tools. The Color Picker allows users to adjust the values of
red, green, and blue color components individually or in combination to
create desired colors.
Chapter 7: Project-2: Tip Calculator - In this chapter, you will be
introduced to creating a Tip Calculator. A Tip Calculator is a tool or app that
helps you figure out how much tip to leave after having food at a restaurant.
The tip amount varies depending on the country and cultural norms. In
many countries, it is customary to leave a tip of around 15% to 20% of the

--- Page 12 ---
total bill at restaurants. However, some places may have different tipping
customs, and some people may choose to leave more or less than the usual
percentage based on the quality of service or personal preferences. Also,
when dining in a group, it is common to split the total bill, including the tip,
equally among all the individuals to ensure a fair distribution of expenses.
This way, everyone contributes their share, making it easier to handle the
bill and the tip without any confusion or inconvenience. In this chapter, you
will learn how to build a Tip Calculator that will allow users to enter the bill
amount, select the desired tip percentage, and the number of people who
will split the bill. It will help you instantly calculate the tip amount and the
split amount for each user from the total bill amount.
Chapter 8: Project-3: BMI Calculator - A Body Mass Index (BMI)
calculator is a tool or app used to assess an individual’s body weight in
relation to their height. It serves as a basic indicator of whether a person’s
weight falls within a healthy range or deviates from it. BMI is widely used
in healthcare, fitness, and wellness programs to provide a simple yet
informative snapshot of one’s health. The app that we will build in this
chapter is not an exhaustive BMI calculator catering to all age groups but
rather a simplified version aimed at showcasing key concepts of .NET
MAUI. It demonstrates the fundamental functionalities of a BMI calculator,
offering users an interactive way to calculate their BMI and receive a basic
understanding of their weight status.
Chapter 9: Project-4: Unit Converter - A Unit Converter is an invaluable
tool that simplifies the conversion of measurements from one unit to
another. Doing these conversations manually can become complex, even
using a calculator. Unit converters are especially useful for students and a
wide range of professionals in various fields who must perform unit
conversions as a part of their day-to-day work. In this chapter, we will
develop a Unit Converter app that will help users convert values swiftly and
accurately among diverse units of measurement related to length, weight,
volume, area, temperature, and time. The focus will be on understanding
how to use .NET MAUI to develop such an app and not on applying best
practices using design patterns. The application structure is intentionally
kept simple so that a beginner can also follow it easily. Advanced readers
might want to implement it using the Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM)
pattern, which provides the benefit of separating the concerns, making the

--- Page 13 ---
code more maintainable and promotes, and promoting testability. That are
beyond our control.
Chapter 10: Project-5: Weather App - Weather is one such aspect that
affects our lives in many ways. It decides what we do, wear, carry, and how
we travel. A weather app is, therefore, a trusted companion in helping us
navigate different weather conditions and ensure that our lives are not
affected. Besides knowing about the weather and the forecast, the weather
app provides an excellent learning opportunity, as it involves some of the
advanced skills interfacing with REST API, parsing data, and presenting it
in a user-friendly format.
In this chapter, we will develop a simple weather app that will allow the
user to enter the name of a place and find out the weather, particularly the
current temperature and type of weather, and know the weather forecast for
the next 7 days, including max and min. temperature. In the process, we
will learn how to work with REST API and parse the data. We will also
learn how to use the MVVM architectural pattern in application
development.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 14 ---
Code Bundle and Coloured Images
Please follow the link to download the
Code Bundle and the Coloured Images of the book:
https://rebrand.ly/46df18
The code bundle for the book is also hosted on GitHub at
https://github.com/bpbpublications/.NET-MAUI-Projects. In case
there’s an update to the code, it will be updated on the existing GitHub
repository.
We have code bundles from our rich catalogue of books and videos
available at https://github.com/bpbpublications. Check them out!
Errata
We take immense pride in our work at BPB Publications and follow best
practices to ensure the accuracy of our content to provide with an indulging
reading experience to our subscribers. Our readers are our mirrors, and we
use their inputs to reflect and improve upon human errors, if any, that may
have occurred during the publishing processes involved. To let us maintain
the quality and help us reach out to any readers who might be having
difficulties due to any unforeseen errors, please write to us at :
errata@bpbonline.com
Your support, suggestions and feedbacks are highly appreciated by the BPB
Publications’ Family.
Did you know that BPB offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.bpbonline.com and as a print book
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at :

--- Page 15 ---
business@bpbonline.com for more details.
At www.bpbonline.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on BPB books and eBooks.
Piracy
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would be
grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at
business@bpbonline.com with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author
If there is a topic that you have expertise in, and you are interested in either writing or
contributing to a book, please visit www.bpbonline.com. We have worked with thousands of
developers and tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their insights with the global
tech community. You can make a general application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are
recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.
Reviews
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not leave a review on the site
that you purchased it from? Potential readers can then see and use your unbiased opinion to make
purchase decisions. We at BPB can understand what you think about our products, and our
authors can see your feedback on their book. Thank you!
For more information about BPB, please visit www.bpbonline.com.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book’s Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 16 ---
Table of Contents
1. Introduction to Cross-platform Application Development
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Introducing cross-platform app development
Apps versus. websites
App development approaches
Pros and cons of cross-platform app development
Popular development frameworks and technologies
React Native
Flutter
NativeScript
Uno Platform
Avalonia
.NET MAUI
Emerging technologies and cross-platform app development
Conclusion
Points to remember
2. Overview of .NET MAUI
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Introduction to .NET MAUI

--- Page 17 ---
Supported platforms
Understanding how NET MAUI API works
.NET MAUI app anatomy
Pages, Layouts and Views
Pages
Layouts
Views
Evolution of NET MAUI from Xamarin.Forms
Migration from Xamarin.Forms
Manual migration
Assisted migration using .NET upgrade assistant
Platform integration
Conclusion
Points to remember
3. Development Environment Setup
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Installation of Visual Studio IDE
Testing the environment setup
Debugging on Windows
Debugging on Android Emulator
Debugging on Android devices
iOS device provisioning
Pair to Mac for iOS development
Conclusion
Points to remember
4. A Crash Course in C#

--- Page 18 ---
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Introduction to C#
Types, variables, and constants
Strings
Operators and expressions
Branches and loops
Loops
For Loop
Foreach
While and Do-while
Break and continue
Classes, methods, and properties
Classes
Methods
Properties
Inheritance and interface
Interfaces
Delegates and events
Events
Arrays and lists
Conclusion
Points to remember
5. Introduction to XAML
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Overview of XAML

--- Page 19 ---
XAML syntax
Object element syntax
Comments
Attribute syntax
Empty element syntax
Property value syntax
Attached property syntax
Namespaces
Object names
Markup extensions
Passing arguments
Data binding
Conclusion
Points to remember
6. Project-1: Color Picker
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Creating the layout
Creating the data entry section
Specifying colors in XAML
Changing the background color
Generating random colors
Copying the color to the clipboard
Conclusion
Points to remember
7. Project-2: Tip Calculator
Introduction

--- Page 20 ---
Structure
Objectives
Creating the layout
Creating the data entry section
Applying graphical design principles in UI design
Performing the calculation
Conclusion
Points to remember
8. Project-3: BMI Calculator
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Creating the layout
Creating a data entry section
Data binding between UI controls
Data binding to an object
Binding value converters
Conclusion
Points to remember
9. Project-4: Unit Converter
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Creating the main menu layout
Creating the navigational system
Creating the data entry section
Performing the conversions

--- Page 21 ---
Conclusion
Points to remember
10. Project-5: Weather App
Introduction
Structure
Objectives
Introduction to MVVM architecture
Creating the project structure and the UI
Designing the user interface
Updating the UI with date
Updating the UI with place name
Using the weather API
Creating the model
Calling the weather API from code
Creating custom type converters
Updating the UI with weather data
Displaying seven-day weather forecast
Updating the weather forecast
Conclusion
Points to remember
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 22 ---
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Cross-platform
Application Development
Introduction
In today's digital world, people use all kinds of devices like smartphones,
tablets, and computers. They want apps that work well on any device they
use. For someone who wants to develop apps that work seamlessly across
these different devices, it can be overwhelming to decide which tools and
technologies to use. This has made cross-platform app development very
important in software engineering.
In this chapter, we will discuss the basics of Cross-platform application
development. We will start by understanding the need for cross-platform
app development and the problems that it helps address. We will discuss the
advantages and limitations of cross-platform app development and why
cross-platform application development has emerged as a preferred choice
for many developers and organizations, examining its advantages, such as
code reusability, faster time-to-market, and broader audience reach. Then
we will explore various cross-platform development frameworks and tools
that are available for developers. We will also discuss the impact of
emerging technologies on cross-platform app development and its future.
Whether you are a seasoned developer seeking to broaden your skill set or a
newcomer eager to explore the possibilities of cross-platform development,

--- Page 23 ---
this chapter offers a comprehensive roadmap to navigate the exciting and
ever-evolving landscape of multi-platform application development.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introducing cross-platform app development
Pros and cons of cross-platform app development
Popular development frameworks and technologies
Emerging technologies and cross-platform app development
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
Understand the different approaches for app development and their
respective advantages and disadvantages.
Appreciate the need for cross-platform app development.
Learn the advantages and limitations of cross-platform app
development.
Familiarize yourself with some of the popular development
frameworks and technologies used for cross-platform app
development.
Acquire insight into the impact of emerging technologies on cross-
platform app development and its future.
Introducing cross-platform app development
In today's dynamic digital landscape, software developers are presented
with unprecedented opportunities to create applications that cater to the
diverse array of devices used by consumers worldwide. From smartphones
and tablets to wearables, smart TVs, and IoT devices, the proliferation of

--- Page 24 ---
technology has led to a proliferation of platforms, each offering unique
capabilities and user experiences.
Apps versus. websites
Consumers and businesses alike are increasingly drawn to apps over
websites for their unparalleled convenience, personalized experiences, and
seamless integration with the digital ecosystem. Apps offer users instant
access to services and information, eliminating the need to navigate through
browser windows or bookmarks. With features like push notifications,
offline access, and device-specific functionalities, apps provide a more
immersive and engaging experience, fostering deeper connections with
users. Moreover, apps can leverage device capabilities such as GPS,
cameras, and sensors to offer enhanced functionality and context-aware
services. For businesses, apps offer a direct channel to engage with
customers, build brand loyalty, and drive revenue through in-app purchases
and subscriptions. With the rise of mobile-first lifestyles and the ubiquity of
smartphones and tablets, apps have become indispensable tools for both
consumers and businesses, providing a seamless and intuitive way to
interact in the digital age.
The ever-evolving digital landscape and consumer expectations provide
developers with infinite opportunities to innovate and develop solutions that
enhance productivity, entertainment, communication, and more across a
vast range of devices. As the boundaries between physical and digital
worlds blur, software developers find themselves at the forefront of
innovation, leveraging their creativity and technical prowess to build
applications that seamlessly integrate into the fabric of everyday life,
enriching experiences and shaping the future of technology.
App development approaches
Over the years, the proliferation of technology has led to an explosion of
development frameworks and tools for app development, which can be
overwhelming for developers as they navigate the choices available to them
to develop apps. To simplify this landscape and offer clarity and guidance,
we can categorize app development frameworks into five primary types. Let
us look at them in detail:

--- Page 25 ---
Native apps: Native applications are developed for a specific
platform, utilizing the native programming languages and
application programming interface (APIs) provided by the
platform's ecosystem. While native apps offer unparalleled
performance and access to platform-specific features, they require
separate development efforts for each platform, resulting in increased
time and resources. For example, Android applications are created
using Kotlin or Java in the Android Studio integrated development
environment (IDE) and require the Android SDK for development,
and apps are distributed through the Play Store. iOS applications are
created using Swift in Xcode IDE and distributed through the App
Store. Windows applications are created using C# and Visual Studio
IDE and distributed through the Windows Marketplace.
Web apps: Web applications leverage web technologies such as
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to deliver content through web browsers
across various platforms. While web apps offer broad accessibility
and easy deployment, they often lack the performance and
capabilities of native apps, particularly for complex functionalities
and interactions. Websites developed using responsive web design
(RWD) principles with a mobile-first approach are often categorized
under the Web Apps category, providing accessible and optimized
experiences across different devices. progressive web applications
(PWAs) are also a popular approach for app development within the
web apps category, offering native-like experiences and enhanced
usability across various devices.
Hybrid apps: Hybrid applications combine elements of native and
web development, utilizing web technologies within a native shell.
This approach enables developers to leverage existing web
development skills while accessing native device features. However,
compared to fully native solutions, hybrid apps may suffer from
performance issues and limited access to platform-specific features.
Popular hybrid app frameworks are Electron, Apache
Cordova/PhoneGap, Ionic and Blazor, which blend native and web
development technologies in their codebase to deliver cross-platform
functionality.

--- Page 26 ---
Cross-platform apps: Cross-platform applications are a newer
category where apps for all platforms are developed using a single
source code and programming language. When compiled, they mostly
generate native code for each respective platform. This provides a
compelling solution, offering the promise of code reusability and
streamlined development processes across multiple platforms. By
using frameworks and tools designed specifically for cross-platform
development, developers can write code once and deploy it across
various platforms, reducing development time and costs significantly.
Low code/no code apps: The low code/no code (LCNC) approach
to app development represents a radical shift in the software
development landscape, offering a solution for creating applications
without extensive coding expertise. With this approach, individuals
with varying levels of technical proficiency can design, develop, and
deploy applications using intuitive visual interfaces, drag-and-drop
components, and pre-built templates. By abstracting away much of
the traditional coding complexities, LCNC platforms empower users
to focus on solving business problems and achieving their objectives
more efficiently. The limitations of the LCNC approach include
potential constraints on customization, scalability, and complexity
handling, which may not always meet the requirements of highly
specialized or intricate application projects. Popular LCNC platforms
include Microsoft PowerApps, Google AppSheet, Salesforce
Lightning Platform, Mendix, Glide, etc.
Pros and cons of cross-platform app development
Cross-platform app development offers the following advantages:
Code reusability: Cross-platform development allows developers to
write code once and deploy it across multiple platforms, saving time
and resources by avoiding the need to develop separate codebases for
each platform.
Faster time-to-market: With cross-platform development,
developers can simultaneously target multiple platforms, reducing the

--- Page 27 ---
time it takes to launch their app and reach a broader audience.
Cost-effectiveness: By leveraging cross-platform development
frameworks and tools, developers can significantly reduce
development costs compared to building separate native apps for each
platform.
Broad audience reach: Cross-platform apps can be deployed across
various platforms, including iOS, Android, and web browsers,
maximizing the potential audience and market reach for the app.
However, cross-platform app development also has a few limitations,
though these are general and not necessarily applicable to all frameworks.
Let us look at them in detail:
Lack of support from native platform creators: Some of the cross-
platform app development frameworks are not directly supported by
native platform creators. Sometimes, this can cause cross-platform
app development to lag behind, as not all frameworks quickly catch
up to support the latest native API versions. This can result in delays
in accessing new features and functionalities available on specific
platforms.
Performance limitations: Cross-platform apps may suffer from
performance issues compared to native apps, as they often rely on
abstraction layers and additional overhead to achieve platform
compatibility.
Limited access to platform-specific features: Cross-platform
development frameworks may not provide access to all platform-
specific features and functionalities, restricting the app's capabilities
compared to fully native solutions.
Increased complexity: Managing codebases across multiple
platforms and ensuring consistent performance and user experience
can add complexity to cross-platform development projects, requiring
careful planning and implementation.
Dependency on third-party tools: Cross-platform development
often relies on third-party frameworks and tools, introducing

--- Page 28 ---
dependencies and potential compatibility issues that developers must
manage throughout the app's lifecycle.
Overall, while cross-platform development offers significant advantages
regarding code reusability, time-to-market, and cost-effectiveness,
developers should carefully weigh these benefits against potential
performance limitations and platform-specific constraints to determine the
most suitable approach for their app development projects.
Popular development frameworks and technologies
In the dynamic landscape of cross-platform app development, choosing the
right framework or platform is crucial for achieving success. This section
explores some of the most popular frameworks and platforms that empower
developers to build robust and versatile applications that run seamlessly
across multiple devices and operating systems. However, it is important to
note that the landscape of cross-platform app development is rapidly
evolving, and the information presented here may change over time. Let us
look at the popular frameworks and platforms in detail in the upcoming
sub-sections.
React Native
React Native is an open-source framework developed by Facebook for
building cross-platform mobile applications using JavaScript and React. It
originated from Facebook's internal hackathon project, aiming to address
the challenges of building mobile apps efficiently across multiple platforms.
React Native follows the principles of React, a popular JavaScript library
for building user interfaces, by enabling developers to create components
that render native UI elements.
To work with React Native, developers need proficiency in JavaScript and
React and an understanding of mobile app development concepts.
Familiarity with native development concepts and APIs is beneficial but not
required.
React Native offers the following advantages:

--- Page 29 ---
Code reusability: React Native allows developers to write code once
and deploy it across multiple platforms, reducing development time
and effort.
Native performance: React Native bridges the gap between
JavaScript and native code, enabling apps to achieve near-native
performance.
Hot reloading: React Native offers a hot reloading feature, allowing
developers to instantly see changes in the app during development
without rebuilding the entire project.
Rich ecosystem: React Native has a vibrant ecosystem with a wide
range of third-party libraries and tools, enabling developers to extend
the functionality of their apps easily.
React Native also has certain limitations too. Let us look at them in detail:
Platform-specific features: React Native may not support all
platform-specific features out-of-the-box, requiring developers to
write custom native modules or use third-party libraries.
Debugging challenges: Debugging React Native apps can be
challenging, especially when dealing with issues related to bridging
between JavaScript and native code.
Performance variability: While React Native apps can achieve near-
native performance, there may be performance variations across
different devices and platforms.
Rapid changes: React Native is evolving rapidly, with frequent
updates and changes to APIs, which may require developers to adapt
and update their codebase continuously.
Overall, React Native offers a powerful and efficient solution for building
cross-platform mobile applications, leveraging the flexibility of JavaScript
and the performance of native development. However, developers should be
aware of its limitations and be prepared to address them to ensure a
successful app development experience.
Flutter

--- Page 30 ---
Flutter is an open-source UI software development kit created by Google
for building natively compiled applications for mobile, web, and desktop
from a single codebase. It originated from Google's internal project called
Sky, which aimed to develop a portable UI framework. Flutter follows the
principles of reactive programming, enabling developers to create visually
rich, fast, and intuitive user interfaces.
To work with Flutter, developers need proficiency in the Dart programming
language, as Flutter apps are primarily written in Dart. Familiarity with
object-oriented programming concepts and UI design principles is required.
Additionally, knowledge of platform-specific APIs and development tools
may be necessary for certain functionalities.
Flutter offers the following advantages:
Single codebase: Flutter allows developers to write code once and
deploy it across multiple platforms, including iOS, Android, web, and
desktop, saving time and effort.
Fast development: Flutter offers a hot reload feature, allowing
developers to see changes in real-time without restarting the app,
speeding up the development process.
Expressive UI: Flutter provides a rich set of customizable widgets
and animations, enabling developers to create visually appealing and
interactive user interfaces. Widgets are the building blocks of the UI,
which define physical aspects like text and buttons, and layout
aspects such as padding and alignment.
Native performance: Flutter compiles code to native machine code,
resulting in high-performance apps with smooth animations and fast
startup times.
Flutter also has a few limitations. Let us look at them in detail:
Limited third-party libraries: Flutter's ecosystem is still evolving,
and it may lack certain third-party libraries and tools available in
more mature frameworks.
Large app size: Flutter apps may have larger file sizes compared to
native apps, as they include the Flutter engine and framework, which

--- Page 31 ---
can impact download and installation times.
Platform-specific features: While Flutter provides access to many
platform-specific features, some advanced functionalities may require
additional native code integration.
Learning curve: Flutter's reactive programming model and Dart
language may have a learning curve for developers unfamiliar with
these concepts, especially those coming from other programming
backgrounds.
Overall, Flutter offers a powerful and versatile solution for building cross-
platform applications with expressive UIs and native performance. While
Flutter has some limitations, it continues to gain popularity among
developers for its fast development cycles and impressive UI capabilities.
NativeScript
NativeScript is an open-source framework developed by Progress for
building cross-platform mobile applications using JavaScript or TypeScript
and Angular. It originated at Telerik, which was later acquired by Progress.
NativeScript follows the principles of native development, enabling
developers to access platform-specific APIs and UI components directly
from JavaScript or TypeScript code.
To work with NativeScript, developers need proficiency in JavaScript or
TypeScript and Angular, depending on their preferred development
approach. Familiarity with native mobile app development concepts and
APIs is beneficial, as NativeScript allows direct access to platform-specific
features.
NativeScript offers the following advantages:
Native performance: NativeScript enables developers to build truly
native mobile apps using JavaScript or TypeScript, resulting in high-
performance applications with access to platform-specific features
and functionalities.
Access to Native APIs: NativeScript provides direct access to
platform-specific APIs and UI components, allowing developers to

--- Page 32 ---
leverage the full capabilities of each platform.
Code reusability: With NativeScript, developers can reuse code
across multiple platforms, reducing development time and effort.
Rich ecosystem: NativeScript has a vibrant ecosystem with a wide
range of plugins, libraries, and tools, enabling developers to extend
the functionality of their apps easily.
There are some known limitations, too:
Learning curve: NativeScript's learning curve may be steep for
developers new to mobile app development, especially those
unfamiliar with JavaScript or TypeScript.
Limited UI components: While NativeScript provides access to
platform-specific UI components, its selection may be limited
compared to other frameworks, requiring developers to create custom
UI elements for certain functionalities.
Plugin compatibility: Some third-party plugins may not be
compatible with NativeScript or require additional configuration to
work properly, which can add complexity to the development
process.
Performance optimization: Achieving optimal performance in
NativeScript apps may require careful optimization and testing,
especially for complex applications with high processing and
rendering requirements.
Overall, NativeScript offers a powerful and flexible solution for building
cross-platform mobile applications with native performance and access to
platform-specific features. While it has its limitations, NativeScript
continues to be a popular choice among developers for its ability to deliver
high-quality mobile experiences across multiple platforms.
Uno Platform
Uno Platform is an open-source framework for building cross-platform
applications using C# and XAML, targeting iOS, Android, Windows,
WebAssembly, macOS, and Linux. It originated from the UWP Community

--- Page 33 ---
Toolkit project and was later developed into a full-fledged cross-platform
framework by the Uno Platform team. Uno Platform follows the principles
of the Universal Windows Platform (UWP), enabling developers to create
visually rich and interactive user interfaces using XAML and leverage the
power of the .NET ecosystem.
To work with the Uno Platform, developers need proficiency in C# and
XAML, as well as familiarity with the .NET ecosystem. Experience with
UWP development concepts and APIs is beneficial but not required.
Additionally, knowledge of platform-specific features and development
tools may be necessary for certain functionalities.
Uno Platform provides the following advantages:
Single codebase: Uno Platform allows developers to write code once
and deploy it across multiple platforms, including iOS, Android,
Windows, WebAssembly, macOS, and Linux, maximizing code reuse
and reducing development time and effort.
Native performance: Uno Platform apps compile to native code,
resulting in high-performance applications with smooth animations
and fast startup times on each platform.
Access to platform-specific APIs: Uno Platform provides access to
platform-specific APIs and capabilities, enabling developers to create
apps that integrate seamlessly with each platform.
Rich UI components: Uno Platform offers a rich set of UI controls
and components, allowing developers to create visually appealing and
responsive user interfaces using XAML.
There are some known limitations, too:
Learning curve: Uno Platform's learning curve may be steep for
developers new to C# and XAML, especially those coming from
other programming backgrounds.
Platform-specific customization: While Uno Platform enables
cross-platform development, developers may need to write platform-
specific code or use platform-specific features to achieve certain
functionalities or optimizations.

--- Page 34 ---
Ecosystem maturity: Uno Platform's ecosystem is still evolving, and
some features or functionalities may be less mature or require
additional development effort compared to other frameworks.
Tooling support: While Uno Platform integrates with Visual Studio
and other development tools, some platform-specific features or
development workflows may require additional setup or
configuration.
Overall, Uno Platform offers a powerful and flexible solution for building
cross-platform applications with native performance and access to platform-
specific features. While it has its limitations, Uno Platform continues to
gain popularity among developers for its ability to deliver high-quality
cross-platform experiences using familiar C# and XAML development
paradigms.
Avalonia
Avalonia is an open-source, cross-platform UI framework for .NET,
designed to build native user interfaces using XAML and C#. It originated
from the .NET Foundation and is maintained by a community of
contributors. Avalonia follows the principles of UWP, enabling developers
to create visually rich and interactive user interfaces that run on multiple
platforms, including Windows, macOS, Linux, Android and iOS.
To work with Avalonia, developers need proficiency in C# and XAML, as
well as familiarity with the .NET ecosystem. Experience with desktop
application development concepts and Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM)
architecture is beneficial but not required. Additionally, knowledge of
platform-specific features and development tools may be necessary for
certain functionalities.
Avalonia provides the following advantages:
Cross-platform compatibility: Avalonia allows developers to build
native desktop applications that run on Windows, macOS, and Linux
platforms, maximizing code reuse and reducing development effort.
XAML-based UI development: Avalonia uses eXtensible
Application Markup Language (XAML) to define user interfaces,

--- Page 35 ---
providing a familiar and expressive markup language for designing
UI layouts and components.
Native performance: Avalonia compiles code to native machine
code, resulting in high-performance applications with smooth
animations and fast startup times on each platform.
Extensible ecosystem: Avalonia has a growing ecosystem of third-
party libraries, controls, and tools, enabling developers to extend the
functionality of their applications easily.
There are a few limitations with Avalonia framework, too. Let us look at
some of them:
Learning curve: Avalonia's learning curve may be steep for
developers new to desktop application development or XAML-based
frameworks, especially those coming from other programming
backgrounds.
Limited third-party support: While Avalonia has a growing
ecosystem, it may lack certain third-party libraries and tools available
in more mature frameworks, requiring developers to implement
certain functionalities themselves.
Platform-specific differences: While Avalonia aims to provide a
consistent development experience across platforms, there may be
platform-specific differences or limitations that developers need to
consider when building cross-platform applications.
The main difference between Avalonia UI and .NET MAUI is in its
approach to rendering user interfaces. Avalonia UI utilizes a custom
drawing engine based on Skia, whereas .NET MAUI relies on the native UI
components of each platform.
Overall, Avalonia offers a powerful and flexible solution for building cross-
platform desktop applications with native performance and access to
platform-specific features. While it has its limitations, Avalonia continues to
gain popularity among developers for its ability to deliver high-quality
desktop experiences using familiar C# and XAML development paradigms.

--- Page 36 ---
.NET MAUI
.NET Multi-platform App UI (MAUI) is an open-source framework
developed by Microsoft for building cross-platform applications using
.NET and C#, targeting iOS, Android, macOS, and Windows platforms. It
originated from Xamarin.Forms and is designed to provide a unified and
modern approach to cross-platform app development. .NET MAUI follows
the principles of the Xamarin ecosystem, enabling developers to create
native user interfaces with a single codebase and a familiar development
experience.
To work with .NET MAUI, developers need proficiency in C# and .NET, as
well as familiarity with XAML for defining user interfaces. Experience
with Xamarin.Forms or other XAML-based frameworks are beneficial but
not required. Additionally, knowledge of platform-specific features and
APIs may be necessary for certain functionalities.
.NET MAUI is chosen as the subject for this book because it represents the
future of cross-platform app development with .NET. It builds upon the
success of Xamarin.Forms and introduces new capabilities and
improvements for building modern, native applications across multiple
platforms. Developers must consider .NET MAUI because it offers a
unified and powerful framework for building cross-platform applications
with native performance, a familiar development experience, and seamless
integration with the .NET ecosystem. As the successor to Xamarin.Forms,
.NET MAUI provides a strategic advantage for developers looking to
leverage their existing skills and investments in .NET to build cross-
platform apps that reach a broader audience.
Emerging technologies and cross-platform app development
Emerging technologies are revolutionizing cross-platform app development,
paving the way for more efficient, feature-rich, and innovative applications.
Generational AI and tools like Copilot are empowering developers with
advanced capabilities, making them more productive and enabling them to
learn and adapt quickly to evolving requirements. By leveraging AI-driven
assistance, developers can streamline their workflows, generate code more
efficiently, and overcome complex challenges with greater ease. However,

--- Page 37 ---
the ultimate leader in this rapidly evolving landscape will be the technology
that not only delivers optimal performance and supports native app features
but also aids developers in implementing quickly, shortening time-to-
market, and providing a supportive ecosystem.
With Microsoft's substantial investment in .NET MAUI, we can be
confident in the longevity and success of businesses aiming to achieve their
goals through cross-platform app development, leveraging the robust
capabilities and extensive ecosystem of the .NET platform.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this chapter has provided a comprehensive overview of
application development methodologies, emphasizing the importance of
cross-platform development in today's digital landscape. We have also
explored the benefits and constraints of cross-platform application
development. We discussed the popular development frameworks for cross-
platform application development and their respective skills requirements,
advantages, and disadvantages. As technology continues to evolve and with
emerging trends like AI-assisted coding, it is easier for developers to
leverage cross-platform app development to bring their ideas to market
quickly while minimizing costs, as opposed to developing in silos using the
respective platform’s native app development stack. Armed with this
understanding, you should be well-prepared to adapt and innovate using
.NET MAUI for cross-platform app development!
In the next chapter, we will cover a high-level overview of .NET MAUI,
including its architecture and core principles to help you utilize its features
effectively. We will also discuss the common APIs for creating dynamic,
cross-platform user interface (UIs) setting the stage for more advanced app
development in subsequent chapters.
Points to remember
Here are some key points from this chapter:
Native app development is inherently time-consuming, expensive,
and lacks code reusability, as each platform requires its own

--- Page 38 ---
development stack.
Web and hybrid approaches offer broad compatibility and easier
development and maintenance with web development skills but may
sacrifice performance and, especially in the case of web apps, limited
access to native features compared to native apps.
Cross-platform application development stands out by offering
versatility to develop native applications that seamlessly run across
multiple platforms using the same codebase.
Cross-platform application development bridges the gap between
native, web, hybrid and low-code/no-code approaches while
maximizing efficiency and reducing development time and costs.
.NET MAUI is preferred for cross-platform app development due to
its robust features, unified development experience, and seamless
integration with the .NET ecosystem, streamlining the development
of high-performance applications across various platforms.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 39 ---
CHAPTER 2
Overview of .NET MAUI
Introduction
Welcome to the exciting world of .NET Multi-platform App UI (.NET
MAUI). As technology advances and many types of devices proliferate, the
need for cross-platform development solutions becomes increasingly
important. .NET MAUI emerges as a comparatively young but powerful and
stable platform in this landscape, offering developers a streamlined approach
to building stunning user interfaces (UI) that run seamlessly across multiple
platforms.
In this chapter, we will begin with a high-level overview of .NET MAUI,
exploring its underlying architecture and the key principles that drive its
functionality. We will gain an understanding of how .NET MAUI works
under the hood (meaning we are going to be looking at the internal workings
of .NET MAUI to understand how it functions at an architectural level) and
how it empowers developers to leverage its capabilities effectively.
Additionally, we will cover a whirlwind tour of the common application
programming interfaces (APIs) provided by .NET MAUI, which help
developers create dynamic and responsive cross-platform UIs. This chapter
will provide a foundation for the readers to understand the flexibility and
versatility inherent in .NET MAUI, which will help while developing apps
in the later chapters of this book.

--- Page 40 ---
Furthermore, we will look into the evolution of .NET MAUI from its
predecessor, Xamarin. Understanding this transition is crucial for developers
looking to migrate their existing Xamarin apps to .NET MAUI seamlessly.
We will look into the migration process and the benefits of transitioning to
.NET MAUI.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introduction to .NET MAUI
Supported platforms
Understanding how NET MAUI API works
.NET MAUI app anatomy
Evolution of NET MAUI from Xamarin.Forms
Migration from Xamarin.Forms
Platform integration
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
Understand the foundational concepts of .NET MAUI.
Understand how .NET MAUI works under the hood.
Exhibit familiarity with the most commonly used APIs in .NET
MAUI.
Learn how .NET MAUI evolved from its predecessor Xamarin.
Understand platform-specific integration concepts.
Introduction to .NET MAUI
.NET MAUI is an open-source, cross-platform framework designed for
developing native mobile and desktop applications using C# and XAML.
Unlike traditional development approaches where separate codebases are

--- Page 41 ---
required for each platform, .NET MAUI enables developers to create apps
that seamlessly run on Android, iOS, macOS, and Windows from a single
shared codebase.
Under the hood, .NET MAUI unifies the APIs of Android, iOS, macOS, and
Windows into a unified API. Thus, developers have a write-once-run-
anywhere experience. At the same time, it also provides developers with
deep access to each native platform's functionalities, providing maximum
flexibility and control.
Along with .NET Framework 6.0, Microsoft introduced a set of platform-
specific frameworks, namely .NET Android, .NET iOS, .NET macOS, and
Windows UI 3 (WinUI 3) library. These frameworks share a common .NET
Base Class Library (BCL), which abstracts platform-specific details from
the code. Mono serves as the .NET runtime environment for apps running in
Android, iOS, and macOS. For Windows, .NET CoreCLR powers the
execution environment.
Although the BCL facilitates sharing common business logic across different
platforms, each platform has its own unique way of defining user interfaces
and interaction models. Traditionally, developers had to maintain separate
codebases for each platform-specific family of devices. .NET MAUI
eliminates the need to maintain multiple codebases by providing a unified
framework for building UIs for mobile and desktop apps. In a .NET MAUI
app, developers primarily interact with the .NET MAUI API, which directly
communicates with native platform APIs. Occasionally, developers may
need to implement platform-specific features. In such cases, they can utilize
methods within the platform-specific framework, as indicated in the
following figure:

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 2.1: .NET MAUI architecture
.NET MAUI apps can be developed on both PC and Mac platforms and
compiled into native app packages. Let us understand this indetail:
Android apps are compiled from C# into an intermediate language
(IL) and then just-in-time (JIT) compiled into native assembly when
launched.
iOS apps are fully ahead-of-time (AOT) compiled from C# into
native ARM(a semi-conductor technology company) assembly code.
macOS apps utilize Mac Catalyst, which converts iOS apps built with
UIKit into desktop apps augmented with additional AppKit and
platform APIs.
Windows apps leverage the Windows UI 3 (WinUI 3) library to create
native desktop apps targeting the Windows platform.
Using .NET MAUI, developers can streamline app development, reduce
overhead, and deliver seamless user experiences across a variety of devices

--- Page 43 ---
and platforms.
Supported platforms
.NET MAUI apps can be developed for the following platforms:
Android 5.0 (API 21) or higher
iOS 11 or higher
macOS 10.15 or higher
Windows 11 and Windows 10 version 1809 or higher
Tizen, an operating system (OS) developed by Samsung, is also
supported
.NET MAUI Blazor apps, however, have the following platform
requirements:
Android 7.0 (API 24) or higher
iOS 14 or higher
macOS 11 or higher
Understanding how NET MAUI API works
.NET MAUI separates the implementation of UI elements from their logical
descriptions. The UI is described using XAML, which is an XML-based,
platform-neutral language. This way we can achieve the abstraction of the
UI from the logical implementation. For example, let us consider the
following XAML snippet used to create a button control:
1. <Button Text="Click me"
2.         Clicked="OnCounterClicked"
3.         HorizontalOptions="Center" />
In the preceding code snippet, we have defined the button's label to display
the string (Click me). It is also specified that on clicking the button, it will
trigger the method OnCounterClicked. We can also assign additional
properties for the button control to modify its layout and text, with text

--- Page 44 ---
formatting options like emphasizing the text or centering the text for better
visual accessibility.
Alternatively, you have the option to dynamically create the UI using C#
code. This method allows you to create dynamic layouts based on the
context. For example, you could choose not to display certain controls if the
user does not have the necessary authorization level.
Under the hood, .NET MAUI optimizes performance by generating native
code tailored to the target device. This is achieved through platform-specific
handlers for each UI element and platform. For example, targeting iOS will
map .NET MAUI code to an iOS UIButton, while on Android, it will
correspond to an Android AppCompatButton. These handlers are indirectly
accessed via control-specific interfaces provided by .NET MAUI, such as
IButton for buttons. Refer to the following figure for an illustration of how
the handlers map the native views to the UI elements:
Figure 2.2: Mapping of UI elements to native views
.NET MAUI simplifies access to common controls like buttons, as well as
other essential elements such as text entry fields, labels, and date pickers. We
will discuss the commonly used controls next. Beyond individual controls,
.NET MAUI also enriches app development by providing the following:

--- Page 45 ---
A sophisticated layout engine that will help to create intricate designs
of pages.
Various page types will facilitate diverse navigation patterns,
including navigation drawers, which is a common feature in most
mobile apps today.
Support for data binding.
Custom handler creation to refine the presentation of UI elements.
Direct access to native APIs and abstraction of common mobile and
desktop app needs apart from the UI. The essentials library empowers
apps to interact with device features like GPS, accelerometer, battery,
and network states, along with numerous other sensors and services
essential for mobile development.
Promoting the use of elegant and maintainable development practices.
.NET MAUI app anatomy
The user interface of a .NET MAUI App is constructed using objects, also
known as controls, that map to the native controls of each target platform.
The controls can be classified into three different categories:
Pages
Layouts
Views
Refer to the following figure for an illustration of a .NET MAUI app
structure:

--- Page 46 ---
Figure 2.3: .NET MAUI app structure
Pages, Layouts and Views
In this section, we will explore the foundational components of .NET MAUI
applications Pages, Layouts, and Views. Each plays a crucial role in
structuring the user interface, enabling developers to create intuitive and
responsive designs.
Pages
All .NET MAUI applications contain one or more pages. Generally, each
screen or window in a .NET MAUI app consists of one page, which
occupies the entire screen or window. The page can have only one content,
and in order to design a screen with multiple controls, we normally use a
Layout as the child of the Page.
.NET MAUI has the following types of Pages:
ContentPage: Displays a single view and is a commonly used page
type.
FlyoutPage: Manages two related pages of information—a
FlyoutPage presenting items and a detail page providing details about
items on the FlyoutPage.

--- Page 47 ---
NavigationPage: Offers a hierarchical navigation experience,
allowing navigation through pages forwards and backward.
TabbedPage: Contains a series of pages navigable by tabs located at
the top or bottom of the page, with each tab loading the corresponding
page content.
Layouts
.NET MAUI layouts are used to organize user interface controls into visual
arrangements. Each layout typically contains multiple elements, which can
be other layouts or views. These layout classes have inherent behaviors for
positioning and sizing child elements. .NET MAUI contains the following
layouts:
Grid: Arranges child elements in a grid of rows and columns.
HorizontalStackLayout: Arranges child elements in a horizontal
stack.
StackLayout: Arranges child elements in either a vertical or
horizontal stack.
VerticalStackLayout: Arranges child elements in a vertical stack.
BindableLayout: Allows any layout class to populate its content by
binding to a collection of items, with the ability to customize the
appearance of each item.
FlexLayout: Enables stacking or wrapping of children with various
alignment and orientation options.
AbsoluteLayout: Places child elements at specific locations relative
to its parent.
Views
In .NET MAUI, views refer to UI elements like labels, buttons, and sliders,
which are commonly referred to as controls or widgets in other
environments. .NET MAUI includes different types of views, and for the
sake of easy understanding, let us explore the views based on their usage:

--- Page 48 ---
Present data or information: These are the options available to present data
or information:
BoxView: Draws a rectangle or square with specified height, width
and color.
Ellipse: Displays an ellipse or circle.
Label: Displays single-line or multi-line text.
Line: Draws a line between two points.
Rectangle: Draws a rectangle or square.
Map: Displays a map using Microsoft.MauiControls.Maps Nuget
package.
Polygon: Draws a polygon.
Polyline: Draws a series of connected lines.
Path: Displays curves and complex shapes.
Border: Container control with borders and backgrounds that can
wrap other controls.
Image: Displays an image from local file, URI, or an embedded
resource.
Frame: Wraps a view or layout with configurable border, color,
shadow, etc.
WebView: Displays web pages or local HTML content.
ScrollView: Provides scrolling for content.
To initiate commands:The following options can be used to initiate
commands:
Button: Responds to tap/click for code execution.
RadioButton: Allows selection of one option from a set.
SearchBar: User input control for initiating a search.
SwipeView: Container control with context menu revealed by a
swiping gesture.

--- Page 49 ---
RefreshView: Provides pull-to-refresh for scrollable content.
To set values: The following options can be used to set values:
CheckBox: Enables selection of Boolean value with checkable button.
Slider: Selects double value from continuous range.
Stepper: Selects double value from incremental range.
Switch: Selects Boolean value with on/off button.
DatePicker: Selects a date with the respective platform’s date picker
control.
TimePicker: Selects time with the respective platform’s time picker
control.
To edit text: The following options can be used to edit text:
Entry: Allows entering one or more lines of text.
Editor: Allows entering and editing multiple lines of text.
To indicate activity:
ActivityIndicator: Uses animation to indicate app activity without
progress indication.
ProgressBar: Uses animation to show progress through a lengthy app
activity.
To display collections: The following options can be used to display
collections:
CarouselView: Displays a scrollable list of data items, swiping to
navigate.
ListView: Displays a scrollable list of selectable data items.
CollectionView: Displays a scrollable list of selectable data items
with different layout specs.
TableView: Displays a table of scrollable items, which can be grouped
into sections.

--- Page 50 ---
Evolution of NET MAUI from Xamarin.Forms
.NET MAUI is the evolution of Xamarin with better performance, increased
productivity, and a more streamlined developer experience. Microsoft
declared the end of support for Xamarin with effect from May 1, 2024. After
this date, Microsoft will no longer offer bug fixes, security updates, or new
features for Xamarin. If you continue to use Xamarin beyond this date, your
apps may not be compatible with the latest versions of Android and iOS.
Also, deployment to the Android and iOS app stores will no longer be
possible.
If you are presently utilizing Xamarin, it is advisable to migrate to .NET
MAUI. Microsoft has furnished a roadmap and resources to assist
developers in navigating this transition. If you are familiar with Xamarin,
transitioning to .NET MAUI will feel intuitive due to its similarities.
It would be good to know how .NET MAUI evolved from Xamarin. For this,
you will have to understand a little about the .NET Framework. If someone
told you or if you have read anywhere that .NET Framework is proprietary
and only meant for applications that can run on Windows OS, it is no longer
true. .NET Framework was introduced around 2002 as a proprietary, closed-
source framework for developers to be able to develop Windows and Web
Applications which can run on Windows OS only. The framework consisted
of a large class library called the BCL and a runtime environment called
common language runtime (CLR).
The BCL has thousands of ready-to-use classes that provide the functionality
to develop the user interface, data access, database connectivity,
cryptography, file operations, etc. Some of these classes are versatile, but
some of them are specifically meant for certain types of applications and
hence grouped into sets and referred to as Windows Forms, WPF, ASP.NET,
ADO.NET, Entity Framework, WCF, Workflow Foundation, etc. Some
variants of the .NET Framework, like Windows Mobile and Windows CE,
were meant for older Windows Mobile and hand-held devices. Developers
could use any compatible programming language like VB.NET, or C# or
C++ to develop applications and use the classes in the BCL to develop the
applications as required. The CLR took care of security, memory
management, and exception handling when .NET applications were

--- Page 51 ---
executed. To develop the applications, Microsoft also provided an IDE
called Visual Studio.
The .NET Framework quickly became very popular among developers to
develop apps for the Windows environment. To help run .NET applications
on other Operating Systems, an open-source project called Mono was
initiated by a company called Ximian, which was later acquired by Novell in
2003.
In 2011, Novell was acquired by Attachmate, and the developers of Mono
moved to form a new company called Xamarin, continued the work, and
extended the .NET developer platform with tools and libraries for building
apps for Android, iOS, macOS, and Windows Universal Windows
Platform (UWP). Using Xamarin, developers could write applications using
C# and share the code-base across platforms.
In 2016, Microsoft acquired Xamarin which was bundled with the Visual
Studio IDE for developers to create cross-platform applications.
.NET MAUI is an evolution of Xamarin and extends its capabilities from
mobile to desktop scenarios. The two architectures share some similarities,
but notable distinctions exist between them. Let us look at them in detail:
Xamarin supports building and running apps with the .NET
Framework, while .NET MAUI utilizes the .NET CLI toolchain for
building, running, and publishing .NET apps.
Xamarin employs separate projects for each platform, whereas .NET
MAUI uses a unified project structure where each platform can be
targeted using devices destined for deployment.
In Xamarin, platform-dependent files and code are managed within
distinct projects, whereas in .NET MAUI, they are organized under
platform folders and targeted by platform filename conventions.
Xamarin requires workarounds for accessing native resources,
whereas .NET MAUI offers direct access to native platform APIs.
Xamarin relies on renderers for creating controls, necessitating the use
of custom renderers for customization of native controls, which can
impact performance and app size significantly. .NET MAUI adopts a

--- Page 52 ---
handler architecture that is loosely coupled with native assembly,
resulting in a lightweight app with enhanced performance. While
renderers are still available in .NET MAUI, they are optional.
In the next section, we will discuss more about migrating to .NET MAUI
from Xamarin.
Migration from Xamarin.Forms
Migration from Xamarin.Forms to MAUI can be accomplished through two
methods:
Manual migration
Assisted migration
Microsoft has published detailed documentation on migrating from
Xamarin.Forms to .NET MAUI and it is available on the Microsoft website:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/maui/migration/?view=net-
maui-8.0. We will just discuss the high-level process in this section.
Manual migration
The manual migration process involves migrating each file of the Xamarin
project to MAUI by creating a new MAUI project. While this method
demands significant effort, it is essential for complex and large projects.
Before initiating the migration, it is crucial to thoroughly understand the
project.
The high-level steps for manual migration are mentioned in the following
list:
Update your Xamarin. Forms app to utilize Xamarin.Forms 5.
Upgrade the app's dependencies to their latest versions.
Verify that the app functions correctly.
Create a .NET MAUI app.
Transfer code and configuration from the Xamarin.Forms app to the
.NET MAUI app.

--- Page 53 ---
Migrate resources from your Xamarin.Forms app to the .NET MAUI
app.
Update namespaces as necessary.
Address any API changes encountered during the migration process.
Upgrade or substitute incompatible dependencies with .NET 8
versions.
Compile and thoroughly test your app to ensure proper functionality.
To streamline the upgrade, it is recommended that you create a new .NET
MAUI library project with the same name as the Xamarin.Forms library
project and then copy the code, configuration, and resources into it.
Assisted migration using .NET upgrade assistant
The .NET upgrade assistant assists in upgrading Xamarin.Forms projects to
.NET MAUI by converting project files and performing common code
updates. The Upgrade Assistant performs the following tasks:
Converts Xamarin.Forms class library, Xamarin.iOS, and
Xamarin.Android projects to SDK-style projects.
Updates the target framework to net8.0-android and net8.0-ios as
required.
Sets <UseMaui>true</UseMaui> in project files.
Adjusts project properties as required.
Adds/removes specific NuGet packages.
Removes reference to Xamarin namespaces and replaces them with
.NET MAUI namespaces.
The upgrade assistant offers two types of upgrades:
In-place: Upgrades the project without creating a copy.
Side-by-side: Creates a copy of the project and upgrades it, leaving
the original project untouched.

--- Page 54 ---
Platform integration
In .NET MAUI, each supported platform offers a unique operating system
and platform APIs accessible from C#. It provides cross-platform APIs for
accessing a wide range of platform functionality, such as sensors, device
information, network connectivity, and authentication flows. These APIs are
categorized into different areas of functionality. Let us look at them in detail:
Application model: This includes functionalities like managing app
actions, accessing app information, launching browsers or maps, and
handling permissions and version tracking.
Communication: It covers functionalities related to contacts, email,
networking, phone dialer, SMS, and web authentication.
Device features: This section includes functionalities such as battery
information, device display metrics, device information, device
sensors, flashlight control, geocoding, geolocation, haptic feedback,
and vibration.
Media: It provides functionalities like media picking, taking
screenshots, text-to-speech, and unit conversion.
Sharing: This involves functionalities related to clipboard operations
and sharing files or text.
Storage: It covers functionalities related to file picking, file system
operations, preferences storage, and secure storage.
Additionally, .NET MAUI platform-specifics allow for the consumption of
specific functionality that is available only on a particular platform. When
.NET MAUI lacks specific APIs for accessing platform-specific
functionalities, developers can write their own code to access the required
platform APIs.
Conclusion
In summary, this chapter served as a comprehensive introduction to .NET
MAUI, providing you with the foundational knowledge needed to embark on
your cross-platform development journey. Whether you are a seasoned

--- Page 55 ---
developer or just starting, .NET MAUI offers an exciting opportunity to
build robust and innovative applications that can reach a diverse audience
across various devices and platforms. Let us unlock the full potential of
.NET MAUI together in the subsequent chapters.
In the next chapter, we will discuss setting up your development
environment and configuring it for .NET MAUI app development.
Points to remember
NET MAUI unifies the APIs of Android, iOS, macOS, and Windows
into a unified API.
Developers can also use platform-specific frameworks, namely .NET
Android, .NET iOS, .NET macOS, and Windows UI 3 if required.
Under the hood, .NET MAUI optimizes performance by generating
native code tailored to the target device through platform-specific
handlers for each UI element and platform.
The user interface of a .NET MAUI App is constructed using objects,
also known as controls which can be further classified into Pages,
Layouts, and Views.
Cross-platform APIs for accessing platform functionality such as
sensors, device information, network connectivity, and authentication
flows is supported.
.NET MAUI is the evolution of Xamarin with better performance,
increased productivity, and a more streamlined developer experience.
Xamarin is no longer supported with effect from 1.5.2024 and
migration/upgradation of Xamarin apps is recommended.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 56 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 57 ---
CHAPTER 3
Development Environment Setup
Introduction
In this chapter, we will guide you through configuring your development
environment to ensure optimal results. Since .NET MAUI is primarily focused
on cross-platform development, our main focus will be on setting up your
development environment on the Windows operating system. We will also
discuss the additional steps required for configuring your Android development
environment, which is crucial for testing and deployment.
While we will include details for iOS development, please note that we will not
cover it in detail. The setup process for iOS development involves additional
steps and requires a macOS system, which is beyond the scope of this chapter.
However, we will provide enough information to help you get started with iOS
development if you choose to do so in the future. Let us get your development
environment up and running smoothly.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Installation of Visual Studio IDE
Testing the environment setup
Debugging on Windows
Debugging on Android Emulator

--- Page 58 ---
Debugging on Android devices
iOS device provisioning
Pair to Mac for iOS development
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
Setup your development environment
Debug on Windows environment
Test the app in Android Virtual and a physical device
Test the app in iOS simulator or a device
Learn to pair a Mac to your development environment in Windows for
iOS development
Installation of Visual Studio IDE
Visual Studio is a comprehensive IDE, that provides all the tools for everything
from writing and editing code to debugging, building, and deploying
applications. Alongside these core functionalities, Visual Studio packs
compilers, code completion tools, source control features, extensions, and many
other features to cover every phase of software development. With Visual
Studio, you can write high-quality code efficiently and collaboratively.
Before you begin the installation process, check the prerequisites provided in the
documentation. For Visual Studio 2022, the detailed requirements are provided
at https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/releases/2022/system-
requirements.
Visual Studio is available in three editions tailored to different user needs:
Community, Professional, and Enterprise. The Community Edition offers a fully
featured IDE for students, open-source projects, and individual developers at no
cost, and we will use it for the projects covered in this book. If you are
developing for commercial purposes, please ensure that you check the license
terms and conditions and opt for the Professional or Enterprise editions as
applicable.

--- Page 59 ---
In this chapter, the steps are demonstrated for installing Visual Studio 2022
Community Edition on a Windows 10 PC, which has an x64 processor, 8 GB of
RAM, and 50 GB of Hard disk space. You will need administrator permissions
on the machine as well.
As Visual Studio is a versatile tool for different kinds of applications, it provides
you with a workload-based installer, which allows users to install only the
components they need. Follow these steps:
1. You can download the latest version of the Visual Studio Community
Edition installer from https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/community/.
Refer to the following figure for the webpage from where you can
download Visual Studio Community Edition:
Figure 3.1: Download Visual Studio Community Edition
Unless you have changed the downloads folder path, when the download is
complete, the setup file for installation will be saved to your Downloads folder,
as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 60 ---
Figure 3.2: Check the Downloads folder for the setup file
2. After installing the Visual Studio installer, you can run it to customize your
installation, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 3.3: The Visual Studio installer
3. Choose the workloads indicated and the optional components which are
selected by default and click on Install.
4. The installation process is fully automated and you can check the status
screens for the progress of the installation. Refer to the following figure for
the status message when installation is successfully completed:

--- Page 61 ---
Figure 3.4: Completed status of Visual Studio installation
In case you have already installed Visual Studio IDE for other purposes, you
need not uninstall it.
You can modify the existing installation and add the required workloads or
components any time. You can also install multiple versions of Visual Studio
side by side.
Testing the environment setup
Once your Visual Studio installation is completed, follow these steps:
1. Click the Launch button to start the Visual Studio IDE.
2. You can create a free account to preserve your personalized preferences
across devices, but for the purpose of this chapter, you can skip the step for
now. Refer to the following figure for an illustration of the sign up screen:

--- Page 62 ---
Figure 3.5: Sign-in screen
3. Assuming that you are a first-time user, it is always good to start with a
simple C# Console application to get familiar with Visual Studio IDE.
4. In the start screen, select Create a new project. Refer to the following
figure for the option to select the create a new project:
Figure 3.6: Creating a new project
5. You can scroll through the list of templates or use the template search box
to type in Console application. Click on the Console App template as
shown in the figure:

--- Page 63 ---
Figure 3.7: Selecting the Console App template
6. The programming language that we will be using in this book is C# and so
ensure you select C# in the language drop-down menu. Refer to the
following figure for the option to select the programming language:
Figure 3.8: Selecting the programming language
7. Select the Console App template and click Next.
8. In the next screen, you will be able to configure your new project. Refer to
the following figure:

--- Page 64 ---
Figure 3.9: Configuring the new project
9. Provide a name for the project. It is advisable to use alphanumeric
characters only without any space or special characters. Refer to the
following figure for selecting the project name:

--- Page 65 ---
Figure 3.10: Selecting the project name
10. Choose the desired location. As you can see, by default, the project is saved
it in the \source\repos folder under the logged in user’s profile. Refer to the
following figure:

--- Page 66 ---
Figure 3.11: Selecting the location for the project files
11. A solution in Visual Studio is a container to hold multiple projects. You can
choose a new solution or add the project to an existing location. We will
choose to create a new solution, which will have the same name as that of
the project by default. If desired, you can change it, but this is purely
optional. Refer to the following figure:

--- Page 67 ---
Figure 3.12: Configuring the solution
12. Ignore the option to place solution and project in the same directory and
leave it at its default unchecked setting. Refer to the following figure to
select the option to create a new solution:

--- Page 68 ---
Figure 3.13: Creating a new solution
13. Click Next. Under Additional information, you can choose the
Framework version that you want to target but leave it at the default
setting for now. Refer to the following figure:
Figure 3.14: Configuring additional information for the project
14. Also check the option to avoid using top-level statements, which is a new
feature introduced in a recent version of C# to directly write executable
code without wrapping the code in a C# class or method. Click Create.

--- Page 69 ---
15. By default, a simple Console application is created for you. We will discuss
C# in more detail in a subsequent chapter, but in this chapter, we will just
focus on the basic features of the IDE and the development process to get
you started.
16. The key sections of the IDE are highlighted in the following figure:
Figure 3.15: Visual Studio IDE Layout
17. In the Solution Explorer, you will find a Program.cs which contains the
program.
18. Double-click the file to open it in the editor area to make any changes. For
this example, we have just updated the string in line no. 7 to display a
simple message to the user when the program is executed. Refer to the
following figure:

--- Page 70 ---
Figure 3.16: Editing in Visual Studio
19. After editing the program, it has to be compiled and then executed. Click
on Debug | Start Debugging in the menu bar. An output pane will appear
at the bottom of the editor to display the status of the compilation and
execution process. Refer to the following figure:
Figure 3.17: Building the program
20. If the program has no errors, it will be successfully compiled and you
should be able to see the output of the program in a console window:

--- Page 71 ---
Figure 3.18: The output of the program
21. In case there is an error in the program, as shown in the following figure
where we intentionally removed the semi-colon at the end of line no. 7, the
compiler will display an error during the compilation process, and the
program will not be executed:
Figure 3.19: Viewing errors in Visual Studio IDE
Debugging on Windows
Now, that you are comfortable with the core functionalities of Visual Studio, it is
time to write a simple NET MAUI App and test it on a Windows machine.
Follow these steps for debugging on Windows:
1. From the menu bar, select New Project.
2. Search for MAUI and select .NET MAUI App:

--- Page 72 ---
Figure 3.20: Selecting the .NET MAUI App Template
3. Enter a suitable Project Name and choose the Target Framework version
just like you did for the console application and create the project:
Figure 3.21: Configuring the .NET MAUI project
4. A boilerplate solution is already created for you so you can directly execute
this application:

--- Page 73 ---
Figure 3.22: The default .NET MAUI project structure
5. From the toolbar click on the button which displays Windows Machine to
start debugging on Windows device. Refer to the following figure:
Figure 3.23: Debugging on Windows Machine
6. If this is the first time you are trying to run a .NET MAUI application on
your Windows PC, you will see the dialog as shown in the below figure,
prompting you to enable Developer Mode for Windows.
Figure 3.24: Dialog to enable Developer Mode for Windows
7. To enable Developer Mode, you can either click on the hyperlink provided
in the dialog or alternatively access Developer settings from the Settings

--- Page 74 ---
menu:
Figure 3.25: Searching for Developer Settings
8. In the menu For developers, enable the option under Developer Mode to
Install apps from any source, including loose files:
Figure 3.26: Enabling Developer Mode

--- Page 75 ---
9. Confirm to turn on the Developer Mode:
Figure 3.27: Confirmation to enable developer mode
10. Now, the application will be compiled, and you should be able to view the
output of the default application created by Visual Studio:

--- Page 76 ---
Figure 3.28: Output of .NET MAUI executing in Windows Machine
11. Click on the button a few times and observe that the click count is
incremented in the button’s text.
Your PC is now enabled for developing and debugging on Windows.
Debugging on Android Emulator
Visual Studio lets you run the app in emulators that can simulate different
Android devices. Follow these steps to debug on Android Emulator:
1. First, you need to create and configure the emulator. Go to Tools…
Android… Android Device Manager:

--- Page 77 ---
Figure 3.29: Selecting Android Device Manager
2. Initially, the Android Device Manager will be empty. You can add a new
device by clicking on the New button:
Figure 3.30: Adding a new device in Android Device Manager
3. You can leave the default options as it is and click on Create:
4. Accept the license terms that are displayed.

--- Page 78 ---
Figure 3.31: License Agreement for installing Android virtual device
5. Visual Studio will then download the device image and install it. After this
process is completed, you should be able to see the virtual device listed in
the Device Manager:
Figure 3.32: Virtual device installed
6. The virtual device will now be visible to select in the drop-down list to
select the target for debugging:

--- Page 79 ---
Figure 3.33: Selecting the Android Virtual Device for debugging
7. Select the virtual device and click on the Play button.
8. The emulator will start and if the code is compiled without any errors, the
app will be launched inside the emulator.
Debugging on Android devices
While the Android Emulator is useful for testing your app quickly, it is
important to also test it on a real Android device. To do this, you will need to
turn on Developer Mode on your device and connect it to your computer.
To enable developer mode, follow these steps:
1. Go to the Settings screen.
2. Select About phone.
3. Tap on Build Number seven times until you see the message You are now
a developer!
Refer to the following figure:

--- Page 80 ---
Figure 3.34: Turning on Developer Mode on Android device
Once Developer Mode is enabled, you need to turn on USB debugging:
1. Go to the Settings screen.
2. Select Developer options.
3. Turn on the USB debugging option.
Refer to the following figure:

--- Page 81 ---
Figure 3.35: Allow USB debugging
4. Now, connect your device to the computer using a USB cable. If it is your
first time connecting for debugging, you will see a prompt on your device
asking if you trust the computer.
5. Select the option to always trust this computer to avoid seeing the prompt
again.

--- Page 82 ---
6. Once the device is connected, it will be visible for you to select in the drop-
down list of target devices.
7. Select it and click the Play button to execute the app on your device.
The procedure explained here is good for side-loading onto a device for testing
purposes.
For distributing the app to a large number of users, it is recommended to create a
Developer account in Android Play Store and publish the app to the Play Store.
The procedure is outside the scope of this book.
iOS device provisioning
As already mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, we will discuss setting up
the development environment in Windows PC. If you have a Mac and are
developing on a Mac for the iPhone, you can follow the instructions given here.
When developing a .NET MAUI app for iOS on a Mac, you will need to install
the .NET runtime and the latest version of Xcode from the App Store. Once this
is done, you can execute simple commands in the Terminal to build and deploy
the app to a device or to a simulator.
To test it on an iOS simulator, you must provide its unique device ID (UDID)
in the command while building the app in the Terminal. The UDID will be
available from within the Simulators tab in the Xcode setting for Devices and
Simulators.
To test it on a real iOS device, you need to follow some steps, which are referred
to as device provisioning. Firstly, you need to have an active subscription to
Apple’s Developer Program—which may be either the regular one for
individuals or the Enterprise program meant for organizations. Developers need
to create a certificate, register the device they are using for development, and
create an App ID and a provisioning profile.
When you deploy the app to a device, a provisioning profile is also installed on
the device. This profile checks if the app was signed correctly and if it is
allowed to run on that device. It checks things like the certificate used to sign the
app, the App ID and if the device is registered in the provisioning profile.
Pair to Mac for iOS development

--- Page 83 ---
In case you prefer to use Windows to develop iOS apps, it is possible to do so if
you can connect to a Mac in the same network as Apple’s Build tools run only
on a Mac. Visual Studio provided a Pair to Mac feature using which you can
discover, connect to and authenticate your Mac build host. With this approach,
multiple users can connect to the same Mac simultaneously.
The steps to be followed to establish the pairing are demonstrated in the
following figures:
1. On your Mac, invoke Spotlight by pressing Cmd + Space, and search for
Remote Login and open the Sharing System Preferences window:
Figure 3.36: Accessing Sharing System Preferences
2. Enable the Remote Login option in the Sharing System Preferences
window:

--- Page 84 ---
Figure 3.37: Remote Login option in Sharing System Preferences
3. Set access for Only these users and add your username in the list so that
you can access the Mac through Remote Desktop:

--- Page 85 ---
Figure 3.38: Enabling Remote Login
If you have successfully paired your Visual Studio environment to a Mac build
host, you can test your app in an iOS simulator running on your Windows PC.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have learned how to set up your development environment
to build .NET MAUI apps. We also discussed how you can run your apps in
multiple environments, including Windows, Android, and iOS. In the next
chapter, we will look into C#, the programming language that will be used for
the app development, that will equip you with the essential knowledge needed
for the content in the upcoming chapters of the book.
Points to remember
Here are some key takeaways from this chapter:
Install Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition.
Enable Developer Mode in your Windows PC to test your apps in
Windows.

--- Page 86 ---
Install and configure Android emulator to test your apps in Android
Virtual device.
You can also enable developer mode in the Android device and run the
app in your device.
Testing apps on iOS requires you to have a Mac.
You can develop on Windows if you can pair a Mac build host to your
Visual Studio environment.
Distribution of apps requires you to have a Windows Marketplace, Play
Store or App Store account.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 87 ---
CHAPTER 4
A Crash Course in C#
Introduction
This chapter gives a concise and focused introduction to C# designed to
equip beginners with the essential knowledge needed to follow the chapters
ahead in this book. While this chapter does not provide an exhaustive
coverage of the C# language, it serves as a vital primer to ensure that
readers, especially those new to C# programming, can comfortably follow
and comprehend subsequent discussions. For those seeking in-depth
exploration, this publisher offers comprehensive books dedicated to the topic
in detail.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introduction to C#
Types, variables, and constants
Strings
Operators and expressions
Branches and loops
Classes, methods and properties

--- Page 88 ---
Interfaces and inheritance
Delegates and events
Arrays and lists
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able to understand:
Basic programming concepts in C#
Types, variables, and constants
Manipulate and work with string data type
Use operators and build expressions
Implement branching and decision-making statements
Use object-oriented programming features for modular code
Explore interface implementation and use the concept of inheritance
Leverage the power of delegates and events
Work with arrays and lists for efficient storage and retrieval of data
Introduction to C#
C# (pronounced C-Sharp) is like a Swiss Army knife of programming
languages. It is powerful, yet easy to learn and versatile to develop all kinds
of applications, from websites to mobile apps to games and everything in
between. It was developed at Microsoft by Anders Hejlsberg, and introduced
with the .NET Framework in 2002 and has been continuously evolving since
then. Presently, it is in Version 12.0. The core syntax is like other C-style
languages like C, C++, and Java and follows similar rules:
A program is composed of statements written in separate lines.
Semicolons are used to denote the end of each statement.
Curly brackets are used to group statements, either into blocks,
conditional and looping statement blocks, methods (functions),
classes, etc.

--- Page 89 ---
Comments may be single line using // or multi-line using /* … */
We will now examine specific features of the C# programming language that
will help you get started with app development using .NET MAUI.
Types, variables, and constants
Variables are containers used to store and label information or data that you
can use in your program. When creating a variable, you need to define the
data type of the variable as well. Refer to the following code for declaring a
variable:
1. int x = 5;  // declaring a variable of type integer and 
initializing with the value 5
There are different data types that you can declare in C#, and we will discuss
those in a while, but what is important to know here is that C# is a strongly
typed language. This means that once a variable is declared with a certain
data type, it cannot be changed during the lifetime of the variable.
Constants, similar to variables, are also containers to store data, but the
difference is that the value, once set, does not change throughout the
program:
1. const int y = 7; 
Let us now look at data types in C#. In any programming language, data
types help the programmer specify the following information:
The kind of data to store (numeric, non-numeric, etc.).
Range of values that can be stored.
Amount of memory used to store the data.
Type of operations that can be performed.
To understand the different types of data types in C#, let us refer to the
following figure:

--- Page 90 ---
Figure 4.1: Data types in C#
As you can see, we have divided the data types primarily into two
categories: numeric and non-numeric:
In the non-numeric data types, we have bool, char, string, object, and
dynamic types.
In the numeric category, again, we have two branches: one for whole
numbers and the other for fractional numbers.
Data types for fractional numbers may be single, double, or
decimal.
For whole numbers, we have two sub-categories depending on
whether we want both negative and positive numbers (signed) or
only positive numbers (unsigned).
The following table indicates the .NET equivalent types, along with the
memory taken up by each data type, along with the range of values that can
be assigned:

--- Page 91 ---
C#
Data
Type
.NET equivalent Description Memory
Size(bits) Range Default
Value
sbyte System.Sbyte signed byte 8 -128 to
127 0
short System.Int16 signed short
integer 16 -32768 to
32767 0
Int System.Int32 signed integer 32 -231 to
231-1 0
long System.Int64 signed long
integer 64 -263 to
263-1 0L
byte System.Byte unsigned byte 8 0 to 255 0
ushort System.UInt16 unsigned short
integer 16 0 to 65535 0
uint System.UInt32 unsigned integer 32 0 to 232 0
ulong System.UInt64 unsigned long
integer 64 0 to 263 0
Table 4.1: Overview of C# data types
Strings
In C#, a string is an object of System.String class, representing a sequence
of Unicode characters. Strings are immutable, meaning their values cannot
be changed after creation. Here is a simple example of creating and
displaying a string in C#:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {

--- Page 92 ---
7.         // Creating a string
8.         string greeting = "Hello World!";
9. 
10.         // Displaying the string
11.         Console.WriteLine(greeting);
12.     }
13. }
Let us look at some common string operations that we come across in our
programs:
String concatenation: String concatenation is a common operation
where two or more strings are combined to create a new string. This
can be achieved using the + operator or the string concat method. For
example:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         // String concatenation using the + operator
8.         string firstName = "John";
9.         string lastName = "Doe";
10.         string fullName = firstName + " " + lastName;
11. 
12.         // String concatenation using string.Concat method
13.         string greeting = string.Concat("Hello, ", fullName, "!");
14. 
15.         // Displaying the concatenated strings

--- Page 93 ---
16.         Console.WriteLine(fullName);
17.         Console.WriteLine(greeting);
18.     }
19. }
String interpolation: C# supports string interpolation, a concise and
readable way to embed expressions and variables within a string. This
is achieved using the $ symbol before the string and placing
expressions or variables within curly braces {}as shown in the
following example:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         // String interpolation
8.         string firstName = "John";
9.         string lastName = "Doe";
10. 
11.         // Interpolated string
12.         string fullName = $"{firstName} {lastName}";
13. 
14.         // Displaying the interpolated string
15.         Console.WriteLine(fullName);
16.     }
17. }

--- Page 94 ---
String methods and properties: The System.String class in C#
provides numerous methods and properties for string manipulation. A
few commonly used ones are shown in the following examples:
1. string text = "Hello, World!";
2. int length = text.Length; // Returns 
the number of characters in the string.
3. string message = "MixedCase";
4. string upperCase = message.ToUpper(); // Convert 
the string to uppercase 
5. string lowerCase = message.ToLower(); // Convert 
the string to lowercase
6. string original = "Hello, C#!";
7. string substring = original.Substring(7); // Extracts a 
substring from the original string.
8. string phrase = "C# is amazing!";
9. int indexOfIs = phrase.IndexOf("is"); // Returns the index of 
the first occurrence of a specified character or substring.
String comparison: When comparing strings, it is crucial to use
appropriate methods to ensure accurate results. The == operator
checks for equality of content, while the String.Equals method
provides more options, including case-insensitive and culture-specific
comparisons. Refer to the following code:
1. string str1 = "hello";
2. string str2 = "HELLO";
3. 
4. bool areEqualUsingOperator = (str1 == str2); // false
5. bool areEqualUsingEquals = string.Equals(str1, str2, StringCompa
rison.OrdinalIgnoreCase); // true

--- Page 95 ---
Operators and expressions
Operators are symbols that perform operations on variables and values in an
expression. Operators in C# can be broadly classified into the following
categories:
Assignment operators: Denoted by = sign, this operator is used to
assign a value or the result of an expression to a variable:
1. int num1 = 5;
2. int num2 = num1 * 5;
A self-assignment operator assigns a modified value to itself:
1. num1 += 10 // alternate way of writing num1 = num1 + 10
When you want to increment or decrement the value by one, you can
use prefix or postfix operators, too:
1. num1++;
2. ++num1;
Relational operators: These are used to compare values, and the
result of the comparison is true or false:
Operator Description
== Equal
!= Not Equal
> Greater than
>= Greater than or equal to
< Less than
<= Lesser than or equal to
Table 4.2: Relational operators
Logical operators: These can help evaluate multiple expressions and
are normally used in combination with relational operators:

--- Page 96 ---
Operator Description
&& And
|| Or
! Not
Table 4.3: Logical operators
Mathematical operators: C# provides the following math operators
for numerical expressions:
Operator Description
+ Addition
- Subtraction
* Multiplication
/ Division
% Modulus
Table 4.4: Mathematical operators
While using operators, it is important to take operator precedence into
consideration as some operators will be evaluated first. When writing
expressions involving multiple operators, it is always better to use
parentheses ( ) to group expressions to ensure proper results.
Branches and loops
Branching or conditional statements are used to determine whether a block
of code gets executed. In C#, you can use any of the following:
If-else: The if-else statement in C# provides a straightforward way to
implement branching logic. Here is a simple example to illustrate the
concept:

--- Page 97 ---
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         int number = 10;
8. 
9.         if (number > 0)
10.         {
11.             Console.WriteLine("The number is positive.");
12.         }
13.         else
14.         {
15.             Console.WriteLine("The number is non-positive.");
16.         }
17.     }
18. }
For scenarios involving multiple conditions, the else-if clause can be
added to the if-else construct. This allows for a sequence of
conditional checks, each with its associated code block. A better
alternative is the Switch-Case block.
Switch-case: The switch-case statement allows developers to compare
the value of an expression against a list of possible values and execute
the corresponding block of code. Let us consider a scenario where a
program needs to handle different days of the week and execute
specific actions based on the day:
1. using System;

--- Page 98 ---
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         // Day of the week (1: Monday, 2: Tuesday, ..., 7: Sunday)
8.         int dayOfWeek = 3;
9. 
10.         switch (dayOfWeek)
11.         {
12.             case 1:
13.                 Console.WriteLine("It's Monday!");
14.                 break;
15.             case 2:
16.                 Console.WriteLine("Happy Tuesday!");
17.                 break;
18.             case 3:
19.                 Console.WriteLine("Hello Wednesday!");
20.                 break;
21.             case 4:
22.                 Console.WriteLine("Almost there! It's Thursday.");
23.                 break;
24.             case 5:
25.                 Console.WriteLine("TGIF! Friday!");
26.                 break;
27.             case 6:
28.             case 7:
29.                 Console.WriteLine("Happy Weekend!");
30.                 break;
31.             default:
32.                 Console.WriteLine("Invalid day of the week.");
33.                 break;
34.         }
35.     }

--- Page 99 ---
36. }
In this example:
The switch statement evaluates the value of dayOfWeek.
Cases 1 through 7 handle each day of the week, with specific
messages printed for each day.
The default case captures any value not covered by the defined cases.
Loops
Loping statements are used to repeat a block of code for a specified number
of times or based on some condition. C# supports the following:
For Loop
The For loop is ideal for scenarios where the number of iterations is known
in advance. Here are some key details regarding For loop:
The general syntax for a for loop in C# is as shown in the following code:
1. for (initialization; condition; iteration)
2. {
3.     // Code to be executed
4. }
The loop structure consists of three main components: initialization,
condition, and iteration:
Initialization: This part is executed only once at the beginning of the
loop. It is typically used to initialize a loop control variable.
Condition: The loop will continue executing as long as this condition
is true. If the condition evaluates to false, the loop terminates.
Iteration: This is executed after each iteration of the loop and is
usually responsible for modifying the loop control variable.
Here is a simple example. Let us explore a scenario where we want to print
the numbers from 1 to 5:
1. using System;
2. class Program

--- Page 100 ---
3. {
4.     static void Main()
5.     {
6.         // Using a for loop to print numbers from 1 to 5
7.         for (int i = 1; i <= 5; i++)
8.         {
9.             Console.WriteLine(i);
10.         }
11.     }
12. }
Let us break down this example:
Initialization: int i = 1; initializes the loop control variable i to 1.
Condition: i <= 5; specifies that the loop should continue as long as i
is less than or equal to 5.
Iteration: i++ increments the value of i by 1 after each iteration.
The output of this program will be the numbers 1 to 5.
Foreach
When dealing with collections such as arrays or lists, the foreach loop is a
convenient option for iteration. It provides a simpler and more concise
syntax compared to the ‘for’ loop without having to manage an index
variable.
The following code provides a simple example of how the foreach loop is
used in a program:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         // Creating an array of strings
8.         string[] fruits = { "Apple", "Banana", 

--- Page 101 ---
"Orange", "Grapes", "Mango" };
9. 
10.         // Using foreach to print each element in the array
11.         foreach (var fruit in fruits)
12.         {
13.             Console.WriteLine(fruit);
14.         }
15.     }
16. }
Let us break down this example:
The array of fruits is created with five string elements.
The foreach loop iterates through each element in the fruits array, and
during each iteration, the variable fruit takes on the value of the
current element.
The Console.WriteLine(fruit) statement prints each fruit to the
console.
While and Do-while
The while and do-while loops provide flexible mechanisms for repetitive
execution of code based on a given condition. These loops are particularly
useful when the number of iterations is not known beforehand or when you
want to ensure that a block of code is executed at least once.
The while loop is characterized by its simple and versatile structure. It
repeats a block of code as long as a specified condition remains true. Let us
look at a simple example:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         // Using a while loop to print numbers from 1 to 5
8.         int i = 1;

--- Page 102 ---
9.         while (i <= 5)
10.         {
11.             Console.WriteLine(i);
12.             i++;
13.         }
14.     }
15. }
In this example:
The loop initializes a variable i to 1.
The condition i <= 5 specifies that the loop should continue as long as
i is less than or equal to 5.
The code inside the loop prints the value of i and increments it by 1 in
each iteration.
The output of this program will display numbers 1 to 5.
The do-while loop is similar to the while loop but with a crucial difference:
it always executes the code block at least once, even if the condition is
initially false. Let us illustrate the do-while loop with an example. Here, we
will take user input to guess a secret number:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         // Secret number to guess
8.         int secretNumber = 7;
9.         int guess;
10. 
11.         // Ask the users for input until they guess correct number
12.         do
13.         {
14.             Console.Write("Guess the number: ");

--- Page 103 ---
15.             guess = int.Parse(Console.ReadLine());
16. 
17.         } while (guess != secretNumber);
18. 
19.         Console.WriteLine("You guessed the correct number.");
20.     }
21. }
Let us break down this example:
The do block contains the code to repeatedly ask the user for input.
The while (guess != secretNumber) condition ensures that the loop
continues until the user guesses the correct number.
Once the user guesses the correct number, the loop exits, and a
congratulatory message is displayed.
Break and continue
The break statement is a loop control statement that allows you to
prematurely exit a loop based on a certain condition. When executed, the
break statement immediately terminates the loop, and control is transferred
to the next statement following the loop.
Let us consider a scenario where we want to find the first occurrence of a
particular number in an array using a for loop. Once the number is found,
there is no need to continue the iteration. The break statement proves useful
in such cases as the following example:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         int[] numbers = { 5, 12, 8, 3, 10, 7 };
8.         int targetNumber = 8;
9. 
10.         for (int i = 0; i < numbers.Length; i++)

--- Page 104 ---
11.         {
12.             if (numbers[i] == targetNumber)
13.             {
14.                 Console.WriteLine($"Number {targetNumber} found at index
 {i}.");
15.                 break; // Exit the loop once the number is found
16.             }
17.         }
18.     }
19. }
Let us break down this example:
The for loop iterates through each element in the numbers array.
The if statement checks if the current element is equal to the
targetNumber.
If a match is found, the loop is exited using the break statement.
This ensures that the loop terminates when the target number is found,
preventing unnecessary iterations.
The continue statement, on the other hand, allows you to skip the rest of the
code within a loop for the current iteration and move on to the next one. This
can be helpful when you want to bypass certain elements based on specific
conditions. Consider a scenario where we want to print only the odd
numbers from an array:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Program
4. {
5.     static void Main()
6.     {
7.         int[] numbers = { 5, 12, 8, 3, 10, 7 };
8. 
9.         for (int i = 0; i < numbers.Length; i++)
10.         {
11.             if (numbers[i] % 2 == 0)

--- Page 105 ---
12.             {
13.                 // Skip even numbers and continue to 
the next iteration
14.                 continue;
15.             }
16. 
17.             Console.WriteLine($"Odd number found: {numbers[i]}");
18.         }
19.     }
20. }
Let us break down this example:
The for loop iterates through each element in the numbers array.
The if statement checks if the current element is an even number using
the condition numbers[i] % 2 == 0.
If an even number is encountered, the continue statement is executed,
skipping the Console.WriteLine statement and move to the next
iteration.
This results in the program printing only the odd numbers from the
array.
Classes, methods, and properties
C# is a versatile programming language that supports object-oriented
programming (OOP) principles. Classes, methods, and properties are
fundamental building blocks of object-oriented design, enabling developers
to create modular, reusable, and well-organized code. Let us explore these
concepts with a simple example.
Classes
In C#, a class is a blueprint for creating objects. Objects are instances of
classes, and they encapsulate data and behavior. The structure of a class
includes fields, properties, methods, and other members. Here is a basic
example of a Person class:

--- Page 106 ---
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Person
4. {
5.     // Fields
6.     public string FirstName;
7.     public string LastName;
8. 
9.     // Method to display full name
10.     public void DisplayFullName()
11.     {
12.         Console.WriteLine($"Full Name: {FirstName} {LastName}");
13.     }
14. }
Let us break down this example:
The Person class has two fields (FirstName and LastName) to store
individual's names.
It contains a method (DisplayFullName) that prints the person's full
name to the console.
Methods
Methods in C# encapsulate actions and behaviors that objects can perform.
They define the functionality associated with a class. Let us create an
instance of the Person class and invoke the DisplayFullName method:
1. class Program
2. {
3.     static void Main()
4.     {
5.         // Creating an instance of the Person class
6.         Person person = new Person();
7. 
8.         // Setting values for the fields
9.         person.FirstName = "John";

--- Page 107 ---
10.         person.LastName = "Doe";
11. 
12.         // Invoking the DisplayFullName method
13.         person.DisplayFullName();
14.     }
15. }
Let us break down this example:
An instance of the Person class named person is created.
Values are assigned to the FirstName and LastName fields of the
person object.
The DisplayFullName method is invoked on the person object,
resulting in the output: Full Name: John Doe.
Properties
Properties provide a way to encapsulate and control access to the data within
a class. They allow for the definition of get and set accessors, enabling fine-
grained control over data manipulation. Let us enhance our Person class
with properties:
1. class Person
2. {
3.     // Properties
4.     public string FirstName { get; set; }
5.     public string LastName { get; set; }
6. 
7.     // Method to display full name
8.     public void DisplayFullName()
9.     {
10.         Console.WriteLine($"Full Name: {FirstName} {LastName}");
11.     }
12. }
Now, the FirstName and LastName fields have been replaced with
properties, providing a more controlled way to access and modify the data.

--- Page 108 ---
Inheritance and interface
Inheritance is a cornerstone of object-oriented principles, fostering code
reuse, modularity, and a hierarchical organization of classes. Inheritance
empowers developers to create new classes based on existing ones,
facilitating the construction of efficient and scalable code.
At its core, inheritance enables a new class (called the derived class or child
class) to inherit properties and behaviors from an existing class (called the
base class or parent class). This allows developers to model relationships
between entities and promote code reuse, reducing redundancy and
enhancing maintainability. Here is a simple example to illustrate the concept:
1. class Animal
2. {
3.     public string Name { get; set; }
4. 
5.     public void Eat()
6.     {
7.         Console.WriteLine($"{Name} is eating.»);
8.     }
9. }
10. 
11. class Dog : Animal
12. {
13.     public void Bark()
14.     {
15.         Console.WriteLine($"{Name} is barking.»);
16.     }
17. }
Let us break down this example:
The Animal class serves as the base class, defining a property Name
and a method Eat.
The Dog class is a derived class that inherits from Animal. It
introduces a new method Bark.

--- Page 109 ---
Inheritance allows developers to extend the functionality of a base class in a
derived class. In our example, a Dog can perform actions specific to dogs,
such as barking, while inheriting the general attributes and behaviors from
the Animal class:
1. class Program
2. {
3.     static void Main()
4.     {
5.         // Creating an instance of the Dog class
6.         Dog myDog = new Dog { Name = "Buddy" };
7. 
8.         // Using inherited methods from the Animal class
9.         myDog.Eat();
10. 
11.         // Using methods specific to the Dog class
12.         myDog.Bark();
13.     }
14. }
Let us break down this example:
An instance of the Dog class is created, and the Name property is set
to "Buddy".
The Eat method, inherited from the Animal class, is called on the Dog
object.
The Bark method, specific to the Dog class, is also called.
Interfaces
In C#, interfaces play a pivotal role in achieving abstraction and
encapsulation providing a blueprint for achieving multiple inheritance.
Interfaces enable developers to define a set of methods and properties that
classes must implement, promoting a consistent and contract-based approach
to programming. An interface is a contract that defines a set of methods and
properties without specifying their implementation. It serves as a way to
establish a common ground for different classes to adhere to a shared set of
behaviors. The syntax for declaring an interface is as follows:

--- Page 110 ---
1. interface IShape
2. {
3.     void Draw();
4.     double CalculateArea();
5. }
Let us break down this example:
IShape is an interface with two methods: Draw and CalculateArea.
The interface does not provide any implementation details; it only
defines the signatures of the methods.
Classes that implement an interface must provide concrete implementations
for all the methods declared in that interface. Let us create a Circle class that
implements the IShape interface:
1. using System;
2. 
3. class Circle : IShape
4. {
5.     public double Radius { get; set; }
6. 
7.     // Implementation of Draw method
8.     public void Draw()
9.     {
10.         Console.WriteLine("Drawing a circle");
11.     }
12. 
13.     // Implementation of CalculateArea method
14.     public double CalculateArea()
15.     {
16.         return Math.PI * Radius * Radius;
17.     }
18. }
Let us break down this example:
The Circle class implements the IShape interface by providing
concrete implementations for the Draw and CalculateArea methods.

--- Page 111 ---
The Radius property is specific to the Circle class and is not part of
the interface.
Utilizing interface polymorphism: One of the powerful aspects of
interfaces is that they enable polymorphism. This means that you can treat
objects that implement the same interface interchangeably. Let us
demonstrate this by creating a method that takes an IShape parameter:
1. class Program
2. {
3.     static void DisplayShapeInfo(IShape shape)
4.     {
5.         shape.Draw();
6.         Console.WriteLine($"Area: {shape.CalculateArea()}");
7.     }
8. 
9.     static void Main()
10.     {
11.         // Creating a Circle object
12.         Circle circle = new Circle { Radius = 5.0 };
13. 
14.         // Displaying information using the DisplayShapeInfo method
15.         DisplayShapeInfo(circle);
16.     }
Let us break down this example:
The DisplayShapeInfo method takes an IShape parameter, allowing
it to accept any object that implements the IShape interface.
We create a Circle object and pass it to the DisplayShapeInfo
method, demonstrating that the method can work with any object
adhering to the IShape contract.
Delegates and events
In C#, delegates are powerful constructs that enable the implementation of
function pointers, callback mechanisms, and event handling. They provide a

--- Page 112 ---
flexible and type-safe way to encapsulate method references, allowing
developers to achieve decoupling and promote modular design.
In essence, a delegate is a type that represents references to methods. It
allows methods to be passed as parameters, stored as variables and invoked
dynamically. Delegates are especially useful when dealing with events,
asynchronous programming, and creating extensible frameworks.
Let us explore a straightforward example using a delegate to define a method
signature for a simple arithmetic operation:
1. using System;
2. 
3. // Declare a delegate for an arithmetic operation
4. delegate int ArithmeticOperation(int x, int y);
5. 
6. class Calculator
7. {
8.     // Method to add two numbers
9.     static int Add(int x, int y)
10.     {
11.         return x + y;
12.     }
13. 
14.     // Method to subtract two numbers
15.     static int Subtract(int x, int y)
16.     {
17.         return x - y;
18.     }
19. }
20. 
21. class Program
22. {
23.     static void Main()
24.     {
25.         // Create instances of the delegate, pointing to 
the Add and Subtract methods

--- Page 113 ---
26.         ArithmeticOperation addDelegate = Calculator.Add;
27.         ArithmeticOperation subtractDelegate = Calculator.Subtract;
28. 
29.         // Perform arithmetic operations using the delegates
30.         int resultAdd = addDelegate(5, 3);
31.         int resultSubtract = subtractDelegate(8, 4);
32. 
33.         Console.WriteLine($"Addition Result: {resultAdd}");
34.         Console.WriteLine($"Subtraction Result: {resultSubtract}");
35.     }
36. }
Let us break down this example:
The ArithmeticOperation delegate is declared, specifying a method
signature that takes two integers and returns an integer.
The Calculator class contains static methods (Add and Subtract)
matching the delegate's signature.
Instances of the delegate are created, pointing to the Add and
Subtract methods.
The delegate instances are then invoked with specific parameters,
demonstrating how delegates act as function pointers.
Events
Events are a crucial component for facilitating communication between
different parts of a program. Events allow one class (known as the publisher)
to notify other classes (known as subscribers) when a specific action or state
change occurs.
In .NET MAUI, building user interfaces involves extensive use of events.
For example, a Button’s click event is useful for capturing user interaction
and triggering specific actions in response. Here is a simple example of a
.NET MAUI program featuring a button that responds to a click event:
1. using Microsoft.Maui.Controls;
2. 

--- Page 114 ---
3. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
4. {
5.     public MainPage()
6.     {
7.         InitializeComponent();
8. 
9.         // Create a button
10.         var clickMeButton = new Button
11.         {
12.             Text = "Click Me!",
13.             HorizontalOptions = LayoutOptions.Center,
14.             VerticalOptions = LayoutOptions.CenterAndExpand
15.         };
16. 
17.         // Subscribe to the button's Clicked event
18.         clickMeButton.Clicked += OnClickMeButtonClicked;
19. 
20.         // Add the button to the page
21.         Content = new StackLayout
22.         {
23.             Children = { clickMeButton }
24.         };
25.     }
26. 
27.     // Event handler for the button's Clicked event
28.     private void OnClickMeButtonClicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
29.     {
30.         // Respond to the button click
31.         DisplayAlert("Button Clicked", "You clicked the button!", "OK");
32.     }
33. }
In this .NET MAUI example:
A Button named clickMeButton is created and customized with a
label and layout options.

--- Page 115 ---
The OnClickMeButtonClicked method is designated as the event
handler for the button's Clicked event.
The StackLayout is employed to organize the button within the
page.
When the button is clicked, a simple alert is displayed, signaling the
event response.
Arrays and lists
Arrays and lists serve as indispensable collections for efficiently storing and
managing collections of data. They both provide distinct advantages and
cater to various programming scenarios. Let us look at them in detail:
Arrays: Arrays in C# represent fixed-size collections of elements of
the same type. Declaring an array involves specifying the data type of
its elements and the size of the array. Let us look at some examples to
see how arrays are commonly used:
1. int[] numbers = new int[5]; // declaring an 
integer array with a size of 5
2. // Initializing at declaration
3. int[] numbers = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
4. // Initializing later
5. int[] numbers = new int[] { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }; 
Lists: Lists provide dynamic collections that can grow or shrink in
size at runtime. Lists are part of the System.Collections.Generic
namespace and offer a more flexible alternative to arrays.
1. List<int> numbersList = new List<int>(); 
// declaring a list of integers
2. List<int> numbersList = new List<int> { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }; 
// initializing a list of integers
The key differences between an array and a list are:

--- Page 116 ---
Arrays have a fixed size determined at the time of declaration,
whereas lists provide dynamic sizing, enabling elements to be added
or removed without the need for predefining the size.
Arrays generally have better performance for direct access to elements
due to their contiguous memory allocation. Lists may incur a slight
performance overhead due to their dynamic resizing and memory
management.
Arrays provide fewer built-in methods and features compared to lists.
Lists offer a rich set of methods, such as Add, Remove, Insert, and
more, making them convenient for various operations on collections.
Use arrays when:
The size of the collection is known and remains constant.
Direct, high-performance access to elements is crucial.
Memory efficiency is a priority.
Use lists when:
The size of the collection can change dynamically.
Frequent additions or removals of elements are expected.
Convenient methods for collection manipulation are required.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this crash course in C# has served as a rapid yet robust
introduction to fundamental programming concepts in C#. From types,
variables, and strings to branching, looping, and advanced topics like
classes, methods, delegates, and events, you have prepared a solid
foundation for your journey into C# programming. It is essential to note that
while this chapter provided a concise overview, the vast landscape of C#
holds more in-depth knowledge waiting to be explored. Consider this crash
course as the initial stepping stone in your journey, preparing you for deeper
dives into the language's intricacies. With this newfound understanding, you
should be well-equipped to venture further into the world of C# and unlock
its full potential.

--- Page 117 ---
In the next chapter, we will explore XAML, a declarative language that
facilitates the development of user interfaces and empowers the creation of
concise code for various functionalities.
Points to remember
Here are some key take aways from this chapter:
Understanding and using the right data type is critical when declaring
variables.
Strings are fundamental for handling textual data, and string
interpolation and formatting enhance the readability and flexibility of
data presented to users.
While using operators in expressions, take operator precedence into
consideration to avoid bugs.
Proper use of branching constructs like if-else and switch-case enables
logical decision-making in code.
While choosing the right loop construct for repetitive tasks, ensure to
have the exit condition as well to avoid infinite loops.
Classes encapsulate data and behavior and help contribute to code
modularity and organization.
Implementing interfaces allows for standardized behavior across
diverse classes.
Delegates serve as powerful callback mechanisms allowing for event-
driven programming.
Arrays offer fixed-size collections, whereas lists provide dynamic
sizing.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 118 ---
CHAPTER 5
Introduction to XAML
Introduction
In a .NET MAUI app, the user interface (UI) is basically constructed as a
tree of objects. The UI is generally created using a markup language instead
of C#. This markup language is an XML-based language and is called
eXtensible Application Markup Language (XAML). The markup defines
the .NET MAUI classes and property values. At runtime, the XAML is
parsed, and the objects are instantiated and initialized.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Overview of XAML
XAML syntax
Namespaces
Markup extensions
Passing arguments
Data binding
Objectives

--- Page 119 ---
By the end of this chapter, you will gain a clear understanding of:
Basic concepts of XAML
The syntax of XAML
Different types of constructs like object-element syntax, property-
element syntax, attached property syntax, and markup extensions.
Overview of XAML
XAML was originally developed for Silverlight by Rob Relyea and the team
at Microsoft. As it is a very powerful and productive way for developers to
build rich user interfaces, it has been adopted in many other technologies,
including WP7, WP8, UWP, WinUI, Xamarin, and also in .NET MAUI.
Though apps can be developed completely using C#, defining the UI in
XAML is recommended because of several advantages.
The major advantages that XAML provides are the following:
It allows you to separate the UI design from the code behavior.
XAML is more compact when compared to implementing the same
functionality in C#.
XAML provides a visual representation of the UI structure.
XAML has a great tooling support.
XAML makes it possible to use powerful concepts such as data
binding.
Each Page/View in a .NET MAUI file can be defined in XAML, and a
companion .cs file is used to define the event handlers and methods
containing the programming logic.
XAML syntax
The syntax of XAML is similar to XML, with some additional features that
follow these basic rules as in XML:
The first line starts with an XML prolog, which is provided by default
in all XAML files:

--- Page 120 ---
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
The rest of the XAML file consists of elements organized in a tree
structure.
Refer to the following figure:
Figure 5.1: Logical Tree created from the XAML markup
To create a user interface, the elements must be nested properly. The
way the elements are nested determines the structure of the UI.
The outermost element is called the root element and contains all the
other elements.
Each XAML file must contain exactly one root element, which is the
parent of all other elements. In .NET MAUI, except for the App.xaml
and AppShell.xaml files, the root element in all other XAML Files
will be either a ContentPage, ContentView or ResourceDictionary.
XAML elements represent objects in the UI. For example, a simple UI
with four objects has four XAML elements that correspond to each of
the objects in the logical tree.
Refer to the following figure:

--- Page 121 ---
Figure 5.2: Nesting of elements in XAML
Object element syntax
Using XAML elements to represent .NET MAUI class objects is called
object element syntax because each XAML element represents a .NET
MAUI object.
The default syntax for an element has three parts: the start tag, the content
section, and the end tag, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 5.3: Syntax of a single element
The opening tag consists of the element name wrapped in angle
brackets e.g. <StackLayout>
The end tag will have a slash just before the element name e.g.
</StackLayout>
The content section can have text, other elements or white space

--- Page 122 ---
Comments
For commenting, use the following syntax:
1. <!-- This is a comment -->
Attribute syntax
Remember each element corresponds to a class object. You can set the
properties of the class object using attributes. For example:
1. <Button Width="75"  Height="25" />
In this example, it sets the values of two properties of a Button object:
Width and Height:
Attributes must be placed inside the start tag, after the element name,
and cannot appear in the content section or end tag.
The syntax of an attribute contains an identified followed by an =
(equal to) sign.
The property values must be set using double quotes.
An element may have any number of attributes. If there are multiple
attributes, they must be separated by a white space.
Refer to the following figure:

--- Page 123 ---
Figure 5.4: Syntax of a single element, with attributes
Empty element syntax
In case the element does not have any content, you can specify it in two
ways:
You can leave the content section blank or provide whitespace
between the start and end tags:
1. <Button Width=”100” Height=”50”></Button>
Or,
Use the empty element syntax, in which you have only a single tag,
instead of the start and end tag. It resembles the start tag but, at the
end of the tag, it uses /|instead of >|as the delimiter.
For example, refer to this command:
2. <Button Width=”100” Height=”50” />
Except the XML prolog, all elements must have either an end tag or a self-
closing tag using the empty element syntax.
Property value syntax

--- Page 124 ---
For simple property values, attributes are helpful. For setting complex
property values, we can use the property element syntax in the following
way:
The property is not mentioned as an attribute but nested in the content
section of the element.
For example, refer to this command:
1. <ElementName.PropertyName> Value </ElementName.PropertyName>
This uses dot-syntax notation; the first part is the name of the class,
and the second part is the name of the property.
The XAML parser does not instantiate an object in this case, but sets
the property on the object.
The property element tag cannot contain attributes.
The following example shows how this is useful.
Attribute syntax:
1. <VerticalStackLayout Background="LightBlue">
2. </VerticalStackLayout>
Property-element syntax:
1. <VerticalStackLayout>
2.     <VerticalStackLayout.Background>
3.         LightBlue
4.     </VerticalStackLayout.Background>
5. </VerticalStackLayout>
In the above example, when the Background color property value is simple,
attribute syntax is easier. However, if the property value is complex, like the
following example, then property element syntax will have to be used:
In .NET MAUI we can apply a gradient color to the Background property
using a LinearGradientBrush. This requires you to set two GradientStops
with different colors, and .NET MAUI will take care of providing a smooth
gradient between the two colors. Refer to the following code:
1. <VerticalStackLayout>
2.     <VerticalStackLayout.Background>

--- Page 125 ---
3.         <LinearGradientBrush StartPoint="0,0"
4.                              EndPoint="1,1">
5.             <GradientStopCollection>
6.                 <GradientStop Offset="0"
7.                               Color="Red" />
8.                 <GradientStop Offset="1"
9.                               Color="Yellow" />
10.             </GradientStopCollection>
11.         </LinearGradientBrush>
12.     </VerticalStackLayout.Background>
13. </VerticalStackLayout>
Attached property syntax
Attached properties are special in that it is defined in one class but used in
another. Let us look at an example:
1. <Grid>
2.     <Grid.RowDefinitions>
3.         <RowDefinition Height="*" />
4.         <RowDefinition Height="*" />
5.     </Grid.RowDefinitions>
6.     <Button Grid.Row="1" />
7. </Grid>
In this above example, the Button has an attribute assignment for Grid.Row
property. This is not part of the Button class, but the Row property is
defined in the Grid class. This is what is called an attached property.
When in doubt, observe the class name. If it is different from the class being
instantiated, it is an attached property. In property element syntax, the class
name is the same as the object being instantiated.
Namespaces
As mentioned earlier in the chapter, each part of an XAML tree corresponds
to a specific .NET MAUI class. When the XAML parser needs to create
objects of these types, it must know where to find their definitions. This

--- Page 126 ---
information is communicated to the parser through something called XAML
namespaces.
A XAML namespace is like a special name that represents a group of .NET
MAUI classes. If you want to use a class as an element in your XAML
markup, you need to tell the XAML parser which namespace the class
belongs to.
Using namespaces in XAML is not like using namespaces in C#. In C#, you
include namespaces with a bunch of using statements at the top of the code
file, and then you can use the classes from those namespaces in your code
(as long as you have a reference to the assembly containing the namespace).
In XAML, it is a bit different. Only one namespace can be the default. You
can set the default namespace using the xmlns keyword followed by an
equal sign and then a string that is the name of the default namespace. The
strings look like website addresses, but they are not.
Other namespaces can be declared but need to be provided with a prefix. For
this, you use the keyword xmlns, followed by a colon and a character or
string, followed by an equal sign and the name of the namespace. The prefix
that you declare will have to be mentioned wherever the classes or types
from the respective namespace are being used.
In the following code, you can see the namespaces defined in the beginning
of every XAML file:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="Some Class Name"
5.              Title="Some Title">
6. 
7. </ContentPage>
Besides these, you may also add other namespaces, or from your own
project. If you want to use a namespace that is not a XAML namespace,
there is a special syntax to tell the XAML parser to use a common language
runtime (CLR) namespace like this:
1.              xmlns:local="clr-namespace:MyNameSpace"

--- Page 127 ---
Alternatively, you can write it as the following:
1.              xmlns:local="using:MyNameSpace"
In case the namespace is in another assembly, then you can include the
assembly name as well:
1.              xmlns:local="clr-
namespace:MyNameSpace; assembly=MyAssembly"
Object names
As mentioned earlier in the chapter, XAML is used to instantiate the objects
in the UI of a .NET MAUI app. The actions performed by the objects are
defined in a companion C# file, known as the code-behind file.
By default, XAML instantiates objects without a name, for example:
1. <Button Text=”Click”></Button>
However, in C#, whenever objects are created, a name has to be provided,
for example:
1. Button btn = new Button();
The name is required to define further actions and behavior in the code-
behind file.
When creating objects in XAML, you can provide a name by using the
x:Name attribute:
1. <Button x:Name="btn" Text="Click" />
The x is the prefix mentioned in the standard namespace of the XAML
document, which is used for elements and attributes that are intrinsic to
XAML.
Markup extensions
While XAML is very powerful, there are some limitations. Let us understand
these limitations and how we can deal with them:
The first limitation is that XAML cannot evaluate values and perform
conditional logic during runtime. For instance, let us imagine we have
a Label in our UI, and we want to display AM if the time is before

--- Page 128 ---
noon and PM if it is post-noon. In XAML, there is no direct way to
perform this conditional logic at runtime to set the text accordingly.
Another limitation is that when assigning a value to a property in
XAML, we can use a value type or create a new object. XAML lacks a
syntax for assigning an existing, non-static object to a property.
These are just a couple of limitations where pure XAML just falls short. To
handle such situations and others requiring runtime evaluation, XAML needs
a hook to an external code that is callable at runtime. The code must execute
the necessary actions and return the value or object reference needed for
XAML to complete its property assignment. This functionality is provided
by something called a markup extension.
A markup extension acts as a connection to a class external to XAML,
known as an extension class. The extension class is designed to be used by
the markup extension.
In XAML, a markup extension is written by replacing the string on the right
side of the equals sign in the attribute syntax. It begins and ends with curly
braces.
Here is a basic form of a markup extension:
1. <Button Style=”{StaticResource MyStyle}”
In the above example, we are setting the Style property of the Button using a
markup extension called StaticResource. It searches the program’s
resources for a style named MyStyle and, if found, returns its reference,
which is then assigned to the Style property.
Markup extensions follow specific syntax forms, as shown in Figure.5.5 The
name of the extension class is the first string inside the open curly brace, and
there is no comma following the class name. After the class name, there can
be zero or more strings separated by commas. These strings can be either
simple strings or property/value pairs.
Refer to the following figure:

--- Page 129 ---
Figure 5.5: Two syntax forms for markup extensions
Passing arguments
In .NET MAUI, sometimes, when creating objects in XAML, you might
need to use constructors that need specific information. For this, you can
make use of x:Arguments.
x:Arguments is used to tell the program what information to give to the
constructor when creating the object. For example, when creating a color
object, you can use the x:Arguments to provide details like how much red,
green, and blue it should have. Your number should match the color needs,
like grayscale or different color channels. The following XAML markup
represents a Grid element with a background color defined by a Color
object that takes three specified values (0.25, 0.4, 0.35) as arguments that
define the RGB color components.
1. <Grid>
2.     <Grid.Background>
3.         <Color>
4.             <x:Arguments>
5.                 <x:Color>0.25</x:Color>
6.                 <x:Color>0.4</x:Color>
7.                 <x:Color>0.35</x:Color>
8.             </x:Arguments>
9.         </Color>
10.     </Grid.Background>
11. </Grid>

--- Page 130 ---
Additionally, if you are working with generic types (i.e., types that can work
with different kinds of data), you can use x:TypeArguments to give specific
details. Arguments can be passed to constructors using the following .NET
MAUI XAML language primitives:
x:Array, for Array.
x:Boolean, for Boolean.
x:Byte, for Byte.
x:Char, for Char.
x:DateTime, for DateTime.
x:Decimal, for Decimal.
x:Double, for Double.
x:Int16, for Int16.
x:Int32, for Int32.
x:Int64, for Int64.
x:Object, for the Object.
x:Single, for Single.
x:String, for String.
x:TimeSpan, for TimeSpan.
x:FactoryMethod is used to specify a special method that can be used
to set up an object. This special method must be a public static method
that returns objects or values of the same type as the class that defines
the method.
Let us look at an example:
1. <Grid>
2.     <Grid.Background>
3.         <Color x:FactoryMethod="FromRgba">
4.             <x:Arguments>
5.                 <x:Byte>192</x:Byte>

--- Page 131 ---
6.                 <x:Byte>75</x:Byte>
7.                 <x:Byte>150</x:Byte>
8.                 <x:Byte>128</x:Byte>
9.             </x:Arguments>
10.         </Color>
11.     </Grid.Background>
12. </Grid>
Data binding
In most .NET MAUI apps, the UI represents some data and allows users to
modify it. Moreover, when the underlying data changes, we would like the
UI to be updated as well. In .NET MAUI, this is made possible easily using
data binding.
Data binding, as the name suggests, is a way to connect the data in your
application with the user interface elements. It ensures that the changes in
data automatically reflect in the UI and vice versa without writing a lot of
extra code. It makes the app more responsive and dynamic.
Let us first discuss a situation where you want to bind a TextBox with a
Slider control. You would like the TextBox to show the value of the Slider,
and when you move the slider, the TextBox should update to match.
One way to do this is to write code in the code-behind file to handle events
when the Slider changes. Instead, data binding provides a much simpler
approach and does the heavy lifting for you.
For data binding to work, we need a Source property and a Target property,
and then we can implement a data binding between the two:
1. public Demo1()
2. {
3.  InitializeComponent();
4.  label.BindingContext = slider;
5.  label.SetBinding(Label.ScaleProperty, "Value");

--- Page 132 ---
6.         // Alternatively, you can write a single statement like this:
7.  label.SetBinding(Label.ScaleProperty, new Binding("Value", source: sli
der));
8. }
It is even simpler to implement the data binding in XAML like the markup
shown in the following code:
1.     <StackLayout Padding="10, 0">
2.         <Label x:Name="label"
3.                Text="TEXT"
4.                FontSize="48"
5.                HorizontalOptions="Center"
6.                VerticalOptions="Center">
7.             <Label.Scale>
8.                 <Binding Source="{x:Reference slider}"
9.                          Path="Value" />
10.             </Label.Scale>
11.         </Label>
12. 
13.         <Slider x:Name="slider"
14.                 Maximum="360"
15.                 VerticalOptions="Center" />
16.     </StackLayout>
Data binding is not just useful for binding UI elements to each other. It can
also be used to bind the UI element to the model. To illustrate this, let us
consider a Person class with two properties:
1. public class Person
2. {
3.     public string Name { get; set; }
4. 
5.     public string Email { get; set; }
6. }
If we want to display the details of an object of the Person class in the UI,
let us do it by adding two Entry elements to display the values:

--- Page 133 ---
1. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
2.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
3.              x:Class="DataBindingSessionDemos.Demo"
4.              Title="Demo">
5.     <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
6.         <Entry x:Name="lblName"
7.             VerticalOptions="Center" 
8.             HorizontalOptions="Center" />
9.         <Entry x:Name="lblEmail"
10.                VerticalOptions="Center"
11.                HorizontalOptions="Center" />
12.     </VerticalStackLayout>
13. </ContentPage>
First,we will see how the data binding is done in C# in the code-behind file.
Follow these steps:
1. For each UI element that we want to bind to data, we need a Binding
object to be created by assigning the Path and the Source properties.
2. Then, we can invoke the SetBinding method of the elements and pass
the required arguments—first, the property of the target to which we
want to bind and second, the binding object that we just created in the
previous step.
Refer to the following code:
1. public partial class Demo : ContentPage
2. {
3.     Person p1;
4.     public Demo()
5.     {
6.         InitializeComponent();
7.         p1 = new Person { Name = "John Doe", Email = "j.doe@msn.com"
 };
8. 
9.         var nameBinding = new Binding

--- Page 134 ---
10.         {
11.             Path = "Name",
12.             Source = p1
13.         };
14.         lblName.SetBinding(Entry.TextProperty, nameBinding);
15. 
16.         var emailBinding = new Binding
17.         {
18.             Path = "Email",
19.             Source = p1
20.         };
21. 
22.         lblEmail.SetBinding(Entry.TextProperty, emailBinding);
23.     }
24. 
25. }
Now, let us do the data binding in XAML. You will see how XAML syntax
really shines through and makes the code simpler.
In the UI markup, only one change is required. In the two Entry elements,
use the data binding syntax to map the two properties of the object to the
Text properties of the Entry elements.
Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="DataBindingSessionDemos.ObjectDataBinding"
5.              Title="ObjectDataBinding">
6.     <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="25">
7.         <Entry Text="{Binding Name}"
8.                VerticalOptions="Center"
9.                HorizontalOptions="Center" />
10.         <Entry Text="{Binding Email}"
11.                VerticalOptions="Center"

--- Page 135 ---
12.                HorizontalOptions="Center" />
13.     </VerticalStackLayout>
14. </ContentPage>
In the code-behind file, all you have to do is to create the Person object and
assign it to the BindingContext property of the UI. Refer to the following
code:
1. public partial class Demo : ContentPage
2. {
3.  public ObjectDataBinding()
4.  {
5.   InitializeComponent();
6.   this.BindingContext = new Person { Name="John Doe", Email = "j.do
e@msn.com" };
7.  }
8. }
In the above code snippet, you can see that the content in the code-behind
file is much shorter, for the same functionality.
Note: Please note that this simple example was chosen to give a foundational understanding of
XAML in data binding. The correct way is to extend the model class within the
INotifyPropertyChanged interface. The following code is for your reference:
1. public class Person : INotifyPropertyChanged
2. {
3.     private string name;
4.     public string Name
5.     {
6.         get { return name; }
7.         set
8.         {
9.             if (name != value)
10.             {
11.                 name = value;
12.                 OnPropertyChanged("Name");
13.             }
14.         }

--- Page 136 ---
15.     }
16.     private string email;
17.     public string Email
18.     {
19.         get { return email; }
20.         set
21.         {
22.             if (email != value)
23.             {
24.                 email = value;
25.                 OnPropertyChanged("Email");
26.             }
27.         }
28.     }
29.     public event PropertyChangedEventHandler PropertyChanged;
30.     private void OnPropertyChanged(string propertyName)
31.     {
32.         if (this.PropertyChanged != null)
33.             this.PropertyChanged(this, new PropertyChangedEventArgs(pro
pertyName));
34.     }
35. }
We will discuss this in detail in the upcoming chapters when we use data
binding in our projects.
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have learned how a .NET MAUI user interface is
constructed like a tree. You can build this tree either by writing code in C# or
using a language called XAML. We discussed some of the key points about
XAML, including its syntax rules, attributes, markup extensions,
namespaces, data binding, etc.
In the next chapter, we will apply the knowledge acquired so far to work on
our first project and build a Color Picker app.

--- Page 137 ---
Points to remember
Here are some key takeaways from this chapter:
XAML tree is a group of elements arranged like a family tree.
There is always one element at the top of the tree called the root
element.
Each element in the tree corresponds to a class in .NET MAUI.
Elements can have attributes which are just properties of the classes
they represent.
XAML syntax provides four types of constructs:
Object element syntax
Property-element syntax
Empty element syntax
Attached property syntax
Let us review the different XAML syntax forms that we discussed above:
Name Description Example
Object element syntaxCreates .NET MAUI object <Button></Button>
Attribute syntax Sets the properties of a .NET
MAUI class object
<Button Text=”Click”>
</Button>
Empty element syntaxCreates .NET MAUI object
without any content section<Button Background=”Red” />
Property element syntaxSets the properties of a .NET AUI
class object
<Button.Background> Red
</Button.Background>
Attached property syntaxSets an attached property on a
.NET MAUI class object <Button Grid.Row=”1” />
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 138 ---
CHAPTER 6
Project-1: Color Picker
Introduction
Now that we have the pre-requisite skills, it is time to get our hands dirty and
build our first project. In this chapter, we will develop a Color Picker using the
concepts we have learned so far. A Color Picker, also called RGB Color Mixer,
is an essential tool for graphic designers, artists, and developers who need to
select colors for their application. It is found in various graphic design software,
image editing applications, and web development tools. The Color Picker allows
users to adjust the values of red, green, and blue color components individually
or in combination to create desired colors.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Creating the layout
Creating the data entry section
Specifying colors in XAML
Changing the background color
Generating random colors
Copying the color to the clipboard
Objectives

--- Page 139 ---
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
Create a simple .NET MAUI app using commonly used controls.
Develop the UI using XAML.
Understand how to work with colors in XAML.
You will also learn how to change the background color property of a
control in your app, and generate random colors using C# in your app.
Creating the layout
Follow these steps to create a layout for the app:
1. Start Visual Studio.
2. In the dialog that appears, select the option Create a new project as shown
in Figure 6.1:
Figure 6.1: Create a new project in Visual Studio

--- Page 140 ---
3. Select the programming language as C# and MAUI project to view the
MAUI project templates as shown in the following screenshot:
Figure 6.2: Select MAUI from the drop-down list under project types
4. Select .NET MAUI App and click on Next.
5. Enter the Project name as ColorPicker. Select the preferred destination
folder or leave it with the default setting, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 141 ---
Figure 6.3: Configure your project
6. You can choose the latest Framework version, which is displayed under
Additional information and click on Create:
Figure 6.4: Select the .NET Framework version
7. The MAUI project is created, and within a few minutes, you should be able
to see the project in Solution Explorer:

--- Page 142 ---
Figure 6.5: Default solution in Visual Studio
8. Make the following changes to the boilerplate code in MainPage.xaml.
The ContentPage will serve as the parent for all the controls in your UI.
Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">
5. 
6.     
7. 
8. </ContentPage>
9. Open the code-behind file MainPage.xaml.cs and remove the default
project code, as shown in the following code:

--- Page 143 ---
1. namespace ColorPicker;
2. 
3. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
4. {
5. 
6.  public MainPage()
7.  {
8.   InitializeComponent();
9.  }
10. 
11. }
10. Since this is a simple app with few controls, we will use a Grid which will
serve as the app background. Assign a name to the Grid using the x:Name
attribute, which will let us access the grid in the code-behind file. Refer to
the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground"
7.           BackgroundColor="Black">
8.         
9.     </Grid>
10. 

--- Page 144 ---
11. </ContentPage>
Creating the data entry section
The color picker will need a few controls to set the red, green, and blue values.
For each color component, we will need a Slider for adjusting the value and a
Label to indicate which color it is for. Follow these steps to create the data entry
section:
1. Let us define a frame that will serve as a layout with a border that will help
us wrap all the other controls inside it. Inside the Frame, let us define a
VerticalStackLayout, which will, in turn, hold the label-slider pairs for
each of the red, green, and blue components of a color. Refer to the
following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground"
7.           BackgroundColor="Black">
8.         <Frame>
9.             <VerticalStackLayout>
10.                 <Label></Label>
11.                 <Slider></Slider>
12.                 <Label></Label>
13.                 <Slider></Slider>
14.                 <Label></Label>
15.                 <Slider></Slider>

--- Page 145 ---
16.             </VerticalStackLayout>
17.         </Frame>
18.     </Grid>
19. 
20. </ContentPage>
2. Assign the following values to the Text properties of the Label controls:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground"
7.           BackgroundColor="Black">
8.         <Frame>
9.             <VerticalStackLayout>
10.                 <Label Text="Red Value:"></Label>
11.                 <Slider></Slider>
12.                 <Label Text="Green Value:"></Label>
13.                 <Slider></Slider>
14.                 <Label Text="Blue Value:"></Label>
15.                 <Slider></Slider>
16.             </VerticalStackLayout>
17.         </Frame>
18.     </Grid>

--- Page 146 ---
19. 
20. </ContentPage>
3. Assign names to the Slider controls, as we will have to access these from
the code-behind file. Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground"
7.           BackgroundColor="Black">
8.         <Frame>
9.             <VerticalStackLayout>
10.                 <Label Text="Red Value:"></Label>
11.                 <Slider x:Name="rValue"></Slider>
12.                 <Label Text="Green Value:"></Label>
13.                 <Slider x:Name="gValue"></Slider>
14.                 <Label Text="Blue Value:"></Label>
15.                 <Slider x:Name="bValue"></Slider>
16.             </VerticalStackLayout>
17.         </Frame>
18.     </Grid>
19. 
20. </ContentPage>
With the above markup, let us build and run our solution. You might see

--- Page 147 ---
something like the details displayed in the following figure:
Figure 6.6: Running the app in emulator
4. The layout still needs improvement. You can use the VerticalOptions
attribute in the Frame and VerticalStackLayout and also apply a Spacing
of 20 to give a little bit of breathing space between the controls. Refer to
the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">

--- Page 148 ---
5. 
6.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground">
7.         <Frame Margin="10,0,10,0" 
8.                VerticalOptions="Center">
9.             <VerticalStackLayout VerticalOptions="Center" 
10.                                  Spacing="20">
11.                 <Label Text="Red Value:"></Label>
12.                 <Slider x:Name="rValue"></Slider>
13.                 <Label Text="Green Value:"></Label>
14.                 <Slider x:Name="gValue"></Slider>
15.                 <Label Text="Blue Value:"></Label>
16.                 <Slider x:Name="bValue"></Slider>
17.             </VerticalStackLayout>
18.         </Frame>
19.     </Grid>
20. 
21. </ContentPage>
5. After making these changes, you can build and run the app. You should be
able to see a better-looking screen like the following figure:

--- Page 149 ---
Figure 6.7: Improved layout of the app
Specifying colors in XAML
In XAML, colors can be set in two ways:
Using one of the 148 named colors like black, blue, red, etc.
Using the hexadecimal notation, prefixed with a # symbol.
Earlier, we had set the background color of the grid to black. This could have
been done alternatively using the Hex notation like the following command:
1.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground"
2.           BackgroundColor="#000000">

--- Page 150 ---
When using the Hex notation, the string is parsed in the following order:
Figure 6.8: Hex notation for color
Hence, to apply a red color to the background, you can use the following
markup:
3.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground"
4.           BackgroundColor="#FF0000">
If you run the app, it will display a red colored background, as seen in the
following figure:

--- Page 151 ---
Figure 6.9: Layout after applying background color
Alternatively, you can also set the background color from the code-behind file.
The equivalent C# code is shown in line number 14. As you can see, the Color
class is in Microsoft.Maui.Graphics namespace, exposes a static method
FromRgb() which lets you specify the red-green-blue values in the arguments.
Refer to the following code:
1. namespace ColorPicker;
2. 
3. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
4. {
5. 
6.  public MainPage()
7.  {
8.   InitializeComponent();

--- Page 152 ---
9.   this.Loaded += MainPage_Loaded;
10.  }
11. 
12.  private void MainPage_Loaded(object sender, EventArgs e)
13.  {
14.   AppBackground.BackgroundColor = Color.FromRgb(255, 0, 0); 
15.  }
16. }
Try changing the argument values passed to the static method Color.FromRgb()
to display different colors like the following figure:


--- Page 153 ---
Figure 6.10: Changing the background color from code-behind file
Remember that whenever you make changes in XAML you do not have to stop
debugging and start again. XAML live load feature will update the UI in your
emulator as soon as you save the changes. However, whenever you change the
code in C#, you will have to stop debugging and start again.
Changing the background color
Now, that we understand how we can change the color from C#, let us now read
the slider value and pass it as arguments to the Color.FromRgb() method. The
Slider defines a ValueChanged event, which is raised whenever the value
changes when the user manipulates the slider. The following code is the code
behind the file contains the handler for the ValueChanged event:
1. namespace ColorPicker;
2. 
3. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
4. {
5. 
6.  public MainPage()
7.  {
8.   InitializeComponent();
9.   this.Loaded += MainPage_Loaded;
10.  }
11. 
12.  private void MainPage_Loaded(object sender, EventArgs e)
13.  {
14.   AppBackground.BackgroundColor = Color.FromRgb(0, 255, 0); 
15.  }
16. 
17.  private void slrValue_ValueChanged(object sender, ValueChangedEventAr
gs e)
18.  {
19.         var red = rValue.Value;
20.         var green = gValue.Value;
21.         var blue = bValue.Value;
22. 
23.         Color color = Color.FromRgb(red, green, blue);

--- Page 154 ---
24. 
25.         AppBackground.BackgroundColor = Color.FromRgb(color);
26.     }
27. }
Now, run the application and change the values of the sliders for red, green, and
blue values to see the background color of the grid changing immediately, as
shown in the following screenshot:
Figure 6.11: Changing the background color by adjusting the slider controls

--- Page 155 ---
Generating random colors
Now, let us implement the functionality to generate random colors in the app.
Add a button in the UI as shown in lines 20 and 21, and assign an event handler
for the Clicked event:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground">
7.         <Frame Margin="10,0,10,0"
8.                VerticalOptions="Center">
9.             <VerticalStackLayout VerticalOptions="Center"
10.                                  Spacing="20">
11.                 <Label Text="Red Value:"></Label>
12.                 <Slider x:Name="rValue"
13.                         ValueChanged="slrValue_ValueChanged"></Slider>
14.                 <Label Text="Green Value:"></Label>
15.                 <Slider x:Name="gValue"
16.                         ValueChanged="slrValue_ValueChanged"></Slider>
17.                 <Label Text="Blue Value:"></Label>
18.                 <Slider x:Name="bValue"
19.                         ValueChanged="slrValue_ValueChanged"></Slider>
20.                 <Button Text="Generate Random Color"
21.                         Clicked="Button_Clicked"></Button>
22.             </VerticalStackLayout>
23.         </Frame>
24.     </Grid>
25. 
26. </ContentPage>
In the code-behind file, implement the Clicked event handler as shown in the
following code. We are using the Random class provided in .NET to generate a
random number between the two ranges which are passed as arguments to the
random.Next() method. Remember that RGB values can take a maximum value

--- Page 156 ---
of FF in hexadecimal which is 255 in decimal notation. Refer to the following
code:
1. using Android.Content.Res;
2. using Kotlin.Jvm.Internal;
3. using static Android.Graphics.BlurMaskFilter;
4. 
5. namespace ColorPicker;
6. 
7. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
8. {
9. 
10.  public MainPage()
11.  {
12.   InitializeComponent();
13.   this.Loaded += MainPage_Loaded;
14.  }
15. 
16.  private void MainPage_Loaded(object sender, EventArgs e)
17.  {
18.   AppBackground.BackgroundColor = Color.FromRgb(0, 255, 0); 
19.  }
20. 
21.  private void slrValue_ValueChanged(object sender, ValueChangedEventAr
gs e)
22.  {
23.         var red = rValue.Value;
24.         var green = gValue.Value;
25.         var blue = bValue.Value;
26. 
27.         Color color = Color.FromRgb(red, green, blue);
28. 
29.         AppBackground.BackgroundColor = color;
30.     }
31. 
32.  private void Button_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
33.  {

--- Page 157 ---
34.         var random = new Random();
35. 
36.         var color = Color.FromRgb(
37.         random.Next(0, 255),
38.         random.Next(0, 255),
39.         random.Next(0, 255));
40. 
41.         AppBackground.BackgroundColor = color;
42.     }
43. }
Run the application now and click the Generate Random Color button to view
random colors being set to the Grid’s background, as shown in the following
figure:
Figure 6.12: Added button to generate random color

--- Page 158 ---
Copying the color to the clipboard
The next feature that we will implement is the ability to copy the background
color to the clipboard, generated either through manipulation of the sliders or by
clicking the button.
First, we will provide a label to display the value of the color that is generated
and provide a button to copy this value to the clipboard. In order to do that, we
have added a Frame below all the controls and provided a
HorizontalStackLayout inside it, which will host the Label and the
ImageButton side by side. The Text shown in the Label must be assigned from
C# and hence provide it with a name. The ImageButton is similar to a button
except that it can display an image as well. Use an SVG image saved to the
Resources folder of your project to assign to the ImageButton’s Source
property.
You can download SVG icons for free from many websites such as
https://www.iconfinder.com/icons/211649/clipboard_icon, which is used in
our example:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="ColorPicker.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid x:Name="AppBackground">
7.         <Frame Margin="10,0,10,0"
8.                VerticalOptions="Center">
9.             <VerticalStackLayout VerticalOptions="Center"
10.                                  Spacing="20">
11.                 <Label Text="Red Value:"></Label>
12.                 <Slider x:Name="rValue"
13.                         ValueChanged="slrValue_ValueChanged"></Slider>
14.                 <Label Text="Green Value:"></Label>
15.                 <Slider x:Name="gValue"
16.                         ValueChanged="slrValue_ValueChanged"></Slider>
17.                 <Label Text="Blue Value:"></Label>
18.                 <Slider x:Name="bValue"
19.                         ValueChanged="slrValue_ValueChanged"></Slider>

--- Page 159 ---
20.                 <Button Text="Generate Random Color"
21.                         Clicked="Button_Clicked"></Button>
22.                 <Frame HorizontalOptions="Center">
23.                     <HorizontalStackLayout>
24.                         <Label x:Name="rgbValue"
25.                                VerticalOptions="Center"></Label>
26.                         <ImageButton x:Name="copyBtn"
27.                                      Source="clipboard_icon.svg"
28.                                      HeightRequest="25"
29.                                      WidthRequest="25"
30.                                      Margin="10,0,0,0"
31.                                      Clicked="copyBtn_Clicked"></ImageButton>
32.                     </HorizontalStackLayout>
33.                 </Frame>
34.             </VerticalStackLayout>
35.         </Frame>
36.     </Grid>
37. 
38. </ContentPage>
In the ImageButton’s Clicked event handler, implement the code to copy to the
Clipboard. Note that we have optimized the program to avoid repetitive
statements and created a method SetBackgroundColor() which takes a Color
object as an argument. In addition to setting the Background color of the grid,
this method also converts the color value to a string which is displayed in the
newly added Label in our UI. Refer to the following code:
1. using Android.Content.Res;
2. using Kotlin.Jvm.Internal;
3. using static Android.Graphics.BlurMaskFilter;
4. 
5. namespace ColorPicker;
6. 
7. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
8. {
9. 
10.  public MainPage()
11.  {

--- Page 160 ---
12.   InitializeComponent();
13.         this.Loaded += MainPage_Loaded;
14.  }
15. 
16.     private void MainPage_Loaded(object sender, EventArgs e)
17.     {
18.         Color color = Color.FromRgb(0,0,0);
19.         SetBackgroundColor(color);
20.     }
21. 
22.     private void slrValue_ValueChanged(object sender, ValueChangedEvent
Args e)
23.  {
24.         var red = rValue.Value;
25.         var green = gValue.Value;
26.         var blue = bValue.Value;
27. 
28.         Color color = Color.FromRgb(red, green, blue);
29. 
30.         SetBackgroundColor(color);
31.     }
32. 
33.  private void Button_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
34.  {
35.         var random = new Random();
36. 
37.         var color = Color.FromRgb(
38.         random.Next(0, 255),
39.         random.Next(0, 255),
40.         random.Next(0, 255));
41. 
42.         SetBackgroundColor(color);
43.     }
44. 
45.     private void SetBackgroundColor(Color color)
46.     {

--- Page 161 ---
47.         AppBackground.BackgroundColor = color;
48.         rgbValue.Text = color.ToHex();
49.     }
50. 
51.     private async void copyBtn_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
52.     {
53.         await Clipboard.SetTextAsync(rgbValue.Text);
54.     }
55. }
When the user clicks on the ImageButton and copies it to the clipboard, it is
also important to give feedback to the user. For this purpose, let us include one
more Label named lblInfo in our user interface. This Label can be used to
provide feedback to the user when the color is copied to the clipboard, as shown
in the following code:
1. namespace ColorPicker;
2. 
3. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
4. {
5. 
6.  public MainPage()
7.  {
8.   InitializeComponent();
9.         this.Loaded += MainPage_Loaded;
10.  }
11. 
12.     private void MainPage_Loaded(object sender, EventArgs e)
13.     {
14.         Color color = Color.FromRgb(0,0,0);
15.         SetBackgroundColor(color);
16.     }
17. 
18.     private void slrValue_ValueChanged(object sender, ValueChangedEvent
Args e)
19.  {
20.         var red = rValue.Value;
21.         var green = gValue.Value;

--- Page 162 ---
22.         var blue = bValue.Value;
23. 
24.         Color color = Color.FromRgb(red, green, blue);
25. 
26.         SetBackgroundColor(color);
27.     }
28. 
29.  private void Button_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
30.  {
31.         var random = new Random();
32. 
33.         var color = Color.FromRgb(
34.         random.Next(0, 255),
35.         random.Next(0, 255),
36.         random.Next(0, 255));
37. 
38.         SetBackgroundColor(color);
39.     }
40. 
41.     private void SetBackgroundColor(Color color)
42.     {
43.         lblInfo.Text = "";
44.         AppBackground.BackgroundColor = color;
45.         rgbValue.Text = color.ToHex();
46.     }
47. 
48.     private async void copyBtn_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
49.     {
50.         await Clipboard.SetTextAsync(rgbValue.Text);
51.         lblInfo.Text = "Copied to clipboard";
52.     }
53. }
54. 
Run the app after making the above changes, and when you click ImageButton,
the text should be displayed as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 163 ---
Figure 6.13: Copying the random color to the clipboard
Now that our app is complete, we have one more change to do. Notice that the
Header in the UI has been displaying the default text Home. Edit the
AppShell.xaml file and replace the Title attribute of ShellContent class with
the string Color Picker or your preferred title. Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
2. <Shell
3.     x:Class="ColorPicker.AppShell"
4.     xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
5.     xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
6.     xmlns:local="clr-namespace:ColorPicker"

--- Page 164 ---
7.     Shell.FlyoutBehavior="Disabled">
8. 
9.     <ShellContent
10.         Title="Color Picker"
11.         ContentTemplate="{DataTemplate local:MainPage}"
12.         Route="MainPage" />
13. 
14. </Shell>
Run the app after making the above change, and you should see the final app
view as shown in the following figure:


--- Page 165 ---
Figure 6.14: App User Interface after updating the App Name
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have developed your first project using .NET MAUI, and
hopefully, you have been able to run it on your device as well. In case you faced
any errors, please check the source code provided for reference, compare it with
your code and make the necessary corrections.
In the next chapter, we will improve the skills further by developing a Tip
Calculator.
Points to remember
Here are some key takeaways from this chapter:
Ensure to choose the correct .NET Framework version while creating the
project.
This .NET MAUI app consists of a hierarchy of controls starting with the
ContentPage, which in turn holds a Grid. The Grid control holds the
Frame, and the Frame, in turn, holds the VerticalStackLayout. This is only
to demonstrate how you can develop a polished app easily. If you prefer,
you can also develop the UI using other arrangement of these controls.
We used a solid color to assign to the BackgroundColor property. You can
also use Gradients to improve the aesthetics of the app.
If you have successfully tested the app on the emulator, you can also try
deploying it to your mobile device to check the rendering of the app.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech happenings
around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com


--- Page 166 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 167 ---
CHAPTER 7
Project-2: Tip Calculator
Introduction
In this chapter, you will be introduced to creating a Tip Calculator. A Tip
Calculator is a tool or app that helps you figure out how much tip to leave after
having food at a restaurant. The tip amount varies depending on the country and
cultural norms. In many countries, it is customary to leave a tip of around 15%
to 20% of the total bill at restaurants. However, some places may have different
tipping customs, and some people may choose to leave more or less than the
usual percentage based on the quality of service or personal preferences. Also,
when dining in a group, it is common to split the total bill, including the tip,
equally among all the individuals to ensure a fair distribution of expenses. This
method allows everyone to contribute their share, making it easier to handle the
bill and the tip without any confusion or inconvenience. In this chapter, you will
learn how to build a Tip Calculator that will allow users to enter the bill amount,
select the desired tip percentage, and the number of people who will split the
bill. It will help you instantly calculate the tip amount and the split amount for
each user from the total bill amount.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Creating the layout
Creating the data entry section
Applying graphical design principles in UI design

--- Page 168 ---
Performing the calculation
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able:
To create a complex UI layout using .NET MAUI controls such as Grid,
Frame, VerticalStackLayout, and HorizontalStackLayout controls.
You will also be able to develop the UI in XAML. Further, you will
understand how to work with commonly used controls, including Label,
Entry, Slider, and Button.
You will know how to implement the functionality to calculate the tip
amount and split the amount in C#.
Creating the layout
Follow these steps to create a layout for the app:
1. Start Visual Studio.
2. In the dialog that appears, select the option: Create a new project, as
shown in Figure 7.1:
Figure 7.1: Creating a new project in Visual Studio

--- Page 169 ---
3. Select the programming language as C# and MAUI project to view the
MAUI project templates, as shown in Figure 7.2:
Figure 7.2: Selecting .NET MAUI project template
4. Select .NET MAUI App and click on Next.
5. Enter the Project name as TipCalculator.
6. Select the preferred destination folder or leave it with the default setting as
shown in Figure 7.3:

--- Page 170 ---
Figure 7.3: Configure your project
7. You can choose the latest Framework version, which is displayed under
Additional information, and click on Create, as shown in the following
figure:
Figure 7.4: Selecting the framework version
8. The MAUI project is created, and within a few minutes, you should be able
to see the project in the Solution Explorer, as shown in the following
figure:

--- Page 171 ---
Figure 7.5: Default solution in Visual Studio
9. Delete the code between the ContentPage tags in the boilerplate code in
MainPage.xaml. The ContentPage will serve as the parent for all the
controls in your UI as shown in the following figure:
Figure 7.6: XAML markup after removing the default project code
10. Open the code-behind file MainPage.xaml.cs and remove the default
project code, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 172 ---
Figure 7.7: Code-behind file after removing the default project code
11. For this app, we are going to have a grid with multiple rows and columns
which will serve as the container for the data entry controls that we will add
next.
12. By default, a grid will be created with one row and one column. To create
multiple rows and columns, we use the Grid.RowDefinitions and
Grid.ColumnDefinitions properties of the Grid. Each RowDefinition
declared inside the Grid.RowDefinitions creates a row, and similarly, each
ColumnDefinition declared inside ColumnDefinitions creates a column.
For our app, we will need 5 rows and 2 columns.
13. The height of the rows and width of the columns can be defined in three
ways:
a. Fixed value: To assign a fixed size of logical units.
b. Auto: To take up only as much space as is required for the controls in
that specific row/column.
c. Star: Use star notation for proportional sizing to specify sizes relative to
each other based on proportions or percentages. This allows us to
allocate available space dynamically among the rows or columns based
on their specified proportions, which is better for creating flexible and
responsive layouts.
14. We will use the proportional sizing approach to define the heights of the
rows and width of the columns. Since the height of each row in the Grid

--- Page 173 ---
must be different depending on the controls that we will be placing inside
the respective rows, we will define the proportions accordingly.
15. The two columns can be of equal width and hence can be declared to have
equal proportions. Hence, let us define the Grid’s RowDefinitions and
ColumnDefinitions accordingly. Refer to the following code:
1.     <Grid Padding="5">
2.         <Grid.RowDefinitions>
3.             <RowDefinition Height="0.25*"></RowDefinition>
4.             <RowDefinition Height="0.25*"></RowDefinition>
5.             <RowDefinition Height="0.125*"></RowDefinition>
6.             <RowDefinition Height="0.25*"></RowDefinition>
7.             <RowDefinition Height="0.125*"></RowDefinition>
8.         </Grid.RowDefinitions>
9.         <Grid.ColumnDefinitions>
10.             <ColumnDefinition Width="0.5*"></ColumnDefinition>
11.             <ColumnDefinition Width="0.5*"></ColumnDefinition>
12.         </Grid.ColumnDefinitions>
13.     </Grid>
16. Any control can be placed within a Grid by using its Grid.Row and
Grid.Column properties that represent which column and which row the
control will be placed in. The values of rows and columns start with 0. That
means, if there are two columns in the grid, the first column will be
represented by the value Grid.Column=“0” and the second column by the
value Grid.Column=“1”. Row numbers are also determined in a similar
way.
17. For our app, we will place Frame controls inside the rows and columns. A
Frame control is used to wrap a view or layout with a border that can be
configured with color, shadow, and other options. Frame controls are
generally used to create borders around controls but can also be used to

--- Page 174 ---
create more complex UI. It may be worth mentioning here that a border can
also be used in place of a Frame.
18. For each frame, we will provide a background color using the background
property.
19. The frame controls in rows 1, 3 and 5 will have to stretch across the screen
spanning two columns. Set the Grid.ColumnSpan property of the Frame
control to 2, so that it stretches across two columns. Refer to the following
code:
1.     <Grid Padding="5">
2.         <Grid.RowDefinitions>
3.             <RowDefinition Height="0.25*"></RowDefinition>
4.             <RowDefinition Height="0.25*"></RowDefinition>
5.             <RowDefinition Height="0.125*"></RowDefinition>
6.             <RowDefinition Height="0.25*"></RowDefinition>
7.             <RowDefinition Height="0.125*"></RowDefinition>
8.         </Grid.RowDefinitions>
9.         <Grid.ColumnDefinitions>
10.             <ColumnDefinition Width="0.5*"></ColumnDefinition>
11.             <ColumnDefinition Width="0.5*"></ColumnDefinition>
12.         </Grid.ColumnDefinitions>
13.         <Frame Background="LightBlue"
14.                Grid.ColumnSpan="2"></Frame>
15.         <Frame Background="LightSteelBlue"
16.                Grid.Row="1"></Frame>
17.         <Frame Background="LightGreen"
18.                Grid.Row="1"
19.                Grid.Column="2"></Frame>

--- Page 175 ---
20.         <Frame Background="Beige"
21.                Grid.Row="2"
22.                Grid.ColumnSpan="2"></Frame>
23.         <Frame Background="LightSteelBlue"
24.                Grid.Row="3"></Frame>
25.         <Frame Background="LightGreen"
26.                Grid.Row="3"
27.                Grid.Column="2"></Frame>
28.         <Frame Background="Beige"
29.                Grid.Row="4"
30.                Grid.ColumnSpan="2"></Frame>
31.     </Grid>
20. At this stage, the UI should look like the illustration in Figure 7.8:

--- Page 176 ---
Figure 7.8: Layout of the app
Creating the data entry section
Follow these steps to insert the necessary controls to develop the UI that forms
the data entry section:
1. In the previous section, we added Frames inside the Grid. As the Frame can
take only one child, we will use a layout container like VerticalStackLayout
or HorizontalStackLayout as the child of the Frame and then place the other
controls of the UI inside it.
2. To position the child controls of the VerticalStackLayout in the center, you
can set the two properties HorizontalOptions=Center and VerticalOptions
=Center. However, we need to declare this for all the remaining
VerticalStackLayout controls that we will be adding to the UI later.
Therefore, it is advisable to define a Style and reuse it.
3. A style can be defined at any level of a page hierarchy, and all the descendant
controls can use the style. For our app, we will declare it as a resource at the

--- Page 177 ---
Grid level so that it is available for all the children of the Grid.
4. When declaring style, two properties are mandatorily required:
a. TargetType property, which indicates which type of control can use this
Style.
b. X:Key property provides a name for the style.
5. You can define multiple properties inside a style using Setter element. The
Setter element requires two attributes to be set, Property and Value.
6. Once you have defined the style, you can apply the style in the target control
using the markup extension syntax as shown. Remember that the curly braces
are mandatory here. Refer to the following code:
1.        <Grid.Resources>
2.             <Style TargetType="Frame"
3.                    x:Key="centerFrame">
4.                 <Setter Property="HorizontalOptions"
5.                         Value="Center" />
6.                 <Setter Property="VerticalOptions"
7.                         Value="Center" />
8.             </Style>
9.         </Grid.Resources>
10.         <Frame Background="LightBlue"
11.                Grid.ColumnSpan="2">
12.             <VerticalStackLayout Style=
"{StaticResource centerFrame}">
13.                 
14.             </VerticalStackLayout>
15.         </Frame>
7. For the first row, add a Label and an Entry control for the bill amount, as
shown in the following code:
1. <Grid.Resources>
2.             <Style TargetType="Frame"
3.                    x:Key="centerFrame">
4.                 <Setter Property="HorizontalOptions"
5.                         Value="Center" />
6.                 <Setter Property="VerticalOptions"
7.                         Value="Center" />
8.             </Style>

--- Page 178 ---
9.         </Grid.Resources>
10.         <Frame Background="LightBlue"
11.                Grid.ColumnSpan="2">
12.             <VerticalStackLayout Style=
"{StaticResource centerFrame}">
13.                 <Label Text="ENTER BILL AMOUNT"/>
14.                 <Entry />
15.             </VerticalStackLayout>
16.         </Frame>
As we have applied the style to the VerticalStackLayout to center align the
child controls, the Label and Entry controls will be positioned in the center of
the layout as shown in Figure 7.9:
Figure 7.9: Controls for entering Bill Amount
Note: Notice the Entry displays alphanumeric keyboard by default.
8. Let us add the remaining controls for the UI in the same way. In row 2, for
the Tip %, add a label to denote the tip selected by the user using a slider
control in row 3. The tip amount will be calculated using C# later and it will

--- Page 179 ---
appear under the tip amount.
9. In row 3, place a slider to adjust the tip % mentioned in Step 9.
10. In row 4, we have two sets of controls. In the first column, we will display
the number of people who will split the total bill amount (that is, bill + tip
amount). The number of people will be set by button controls in row 5. The
second column will display the amount that each person has to pay, that is, the
split amount.
11. After completing the above steps, the UI will appear as shown in Figure
7.10:
Figure 7.10: Initial state of Data Entry section
Applying graphical design principles in UI design
Principles of graphical design give designers a set of guidelines for how to
design visually appealing compositions that create wonderful user experiences.
By following basic principles of design like Contrast, Repetition, Alignment,
and Proximity (C.R.A.P.), you can create UIs that people love to use. A gist of
the C.R.A.P. principles is given in Figure 7.11:

--- Page 180 ---
Figure 7.11: C.R.A.P. principles of design
Right now, our UI looks basic and crude. We will now apply some graphical
design principles to make the UI look even better. Follow these steps to achieve
it:
1. Firstly, we will introduce some space between the Frame controls. This can
be done in two ways:
a. By declaring Grid.RowSpacing and Grid.ColumnSpacing properties in
the Grid.
b. By applying margins to the Frame controls.
c. We will use the latter approach.
2. The margin property of a control represents the distance between the element
and its adjacent elements or neighbors. There are three possible ways to
assign a margin to the control:
a. Margin defined by a single value (for example, Margin=“10”): The single
value is applied to the left, top, right, and bottom sides of the element.
b. Margin defined by two values (for example, Margin=“5,10”): The first
value is applied to the left and right of the element and the second value is
applied to the top and bottom of the element.
c. Margin defined by four distinct values (for example,
Margin=“5,10,15,20”): The values are applied to the left, top, right, and
bottom of the element.
3. Using the above understanding, apply appropriate margins to the Frame
controls so that they are not touching each other, but at the same time, related
controls appear together to indicate some kind of association between these
controls.

--- Page 181 ---
4. Next, let us customize the button controls. We can use the button properties
for BackgroundColor, VerticalOptions, HorizontalOptions,
WidthRequest, and FontSize to customize the Button. As the style has to be
applied to both the buttons in row 5, we can define this as a style in Grid.
Resources collection and then using the markup extension syntax we can bind
the style property of the button to the customized style that we create.
5. Now, we will customize the labels displaying the numerical values in the UI
so that there is an emphasis on the values displayed in the UI. We need to use
FontSize and FontAttributes to our custom style for the Label control. Then
apply the style to all the Labels which have to display numerical data.
6. After the above changes are done, the XAML markup under Grid.Resources
would appear as shown in the following code:
1. <Grid.Resources>
2.     <Style TargetType="Frame"
3.            x:Key="centerFrame">
4.         <Setter Property="HorizontalOptions"
5.                 Value="Center" />
6.         <Setter Property="VerticalOptions"
7.                 Value="Center" />
8.     </Style>
9.     <Style TargetType="Button"
10.            x:Key="splitButton">
11.         <Setter Property="BackgroundColor"
12.                 Value="Orange" />
13.         <Setter Property="VerticalOptions"
14.                 Value="Center" />
15.         <Setter Property="HeightRequest"
16.                 Value="50" />
17.         <Setter Property="WidthRequest"
18.                 Value="50" />
19.         <Setter Property="FontSize"
20.                 Value="Body" />
21.     </Style>
22.     <Style TargetType="Label"
23.            x:Key="displayValue">
24.         <Setter Property="FontSize"

--- Page 182 ---
25.                 Value="36" />
26.         <Setter Property="FontAttributes"
27.                 Value="Bold" />
28.     </Style>
29. </Grid.Resources>
To apply the styles to the individuaLcontrols, apply the styles using the markup
extensions as follows:
1. <Label x:Name="lblTip" Style="{StaticResource displayValue}" />
Apply the style that we created for Frame under window. Resources to different
Frames. Refer to the following code:
1. <Frame Background="LightSteelBlue"
2.    Margin="10,10,5,5"
3.    Grid.Row="1">
4. <VerticalStackLayout Style="{StaticResource centerFrame}">
Similarly, add the style to the Button. Refer to the following code:
1. <Button x:Name="btnPlus"
2.   Style="{StaticResource splitButton}"
3.   Text="+"
4.   Clicked="btnPlus_Clicked"></Button>
7. With the above XAML markup our UI should look better than before, as
shown in Figure 7.12:

--- Page 183 ---
Figure 7.12: Improvised UI
Performing the calculation
Now that the UI is complete, let us turn our attention to the functionality. Follow
these steps to define the functionality of the app:
1. In the code-behind file, let us define variables to define the bill amount, tip
%, tip amount, number of people who will be splitting the bill and the amount
to be paid by each person. Now, define the variables billAmount, tipAmount
and amountPerPerson variables as shown in the following code:
2.     decimal billAmount = 0.00m;
3.     
4.     int tip = 0;
5.     decimal tipAmount = 0.00m;
6.

--- Page 184 ---
7.     int split = 1;
8.     decimal amountPerPerson = 0.00m;
2. Observe the use of the suffix m which is required while assigning values to
variables of type decimal.
3. Next, let us declare an UpdateDisplay() function which will convert the
values of the above variables to String and assign to the respective labels that
we have already created in the UI:
1.     private void UpdateDisplay()
2.     {
3.         lblTip.Text = tip.ToString();
4.         lblTipAmount.Text = tipAmount.ToString("F2");
5.         lblSplit.Text = split.ToString();
6.         lblSplitAmount.Text = amountPerPerson.ToString("F2");
7.     }
4. We can call this function when the page loads. We will invoke this method in
the Page Constructor as shown in the following code:
1.  public MainPage()
2.  {
3.   InitializeComponent();
4.          UpdateDisplay();
5.  }
5. Whenever the user enters the bill amount in the Entry control, it is named as
tbTotal in this app, we want to calculate the tip amount and the split amount.
6. Let us implement the code in the completed event handler of the entry:
1.     private void tbTotal_Completed(object sender, EventArgs e)
2.     {
3.         billAmount = decimal.Parse(tbTotal.Text);
4.         Calculate();
5.         tbTotal.Unfocus();
6.         slrTip.Focus();
7.     }
8.
9.     private void Calculate()
10.     {
11.         tipAmount = billAmount * tip / 100;
12.         amountPerPerson = (billAmount + tipAmount) / split;

--- Page 185 ---
13.         UpdateDisplay();
14.     }
7. Notice that the code also includes statements to disable focus on the Entry
and focus on the Slider to adjust the tip %. Whenever the slider value is
changed, we want the values to be updated, which is achieved with the
following code:
1.
    private void slrTip_ValueChanged(object sender, ValueChangedEventArgs
 e)
2.     {
3.         tip = (int)slrTip.Value;
4.         Calculate();
5.     }
8. To adjust the number of people who would be sharing the bill, we have two
buttons. The event handlers of these buttons can be used to calculate the
updated values. Refer to the following code:
1.     private void btnMinus_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
2.     {
3.         if (split > 1)
4.             split--;
5.         Calculate();
6.
7.     }
8.
9.     private void btnPlus_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
10.     {
11.         split++;
12.         Calculate();
13.     }
9. Run the app after making the above changes and test all the functionalities.
10. Now that our app is complete, we have one more change to do. Notice that
the header in the UI has been displaying the default text Home. Edit the
AppShell.xaml file and replace the Title attribute of the ShellContent class
with the string Tip Calculator or your preferred app name. Refer to the
following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>

--- Page 186 ---
2. <Shell
3.     x:Class="TipCalculator.AppShell"
4.     xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
5.     xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
6.     xmlns:local="clr-namespace:TipCalculator"
7.     Shell.FlyoutBehavior="Disabled">
8.
9.     <ShellContent
10.         Title="Tip Calculator"
11.         ContentTemplate="{DataTemplate local:MainPage}"
12.         Route="MainPage" />
13.
14. </Shell>
11. Run the app after making the above change, and you should be able to see
the final app view, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 7.13: Final view of the UI

--- Page 187 ---
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have developed your second project using .NET MAUI and
will be able to run it on your device as well. If you face any errors, check the
source code provided for reference, compare it with your code, and make the
necessary corrections. In the next chapter, we will improve the skills further by
developing a BMI calculator.
Points to remember
Here are some key takeaways from this chapter:
Ensure that you choose the right .NET Framework version while creating
the project.
This app demonstrated how you can develop a complex UI using different
.NET MAUI controls. We have used a Grid inside the ContentPage and
then placed frames inside the Grid which in turn hosted the
VerticalStackLayout and HorizontalStackLayout controls. However, you
may also develop the UI using alternative arrangement of these controls.
We discussed on following graphical design principles while laying out
the controls. While the C.R.A.P. principles are important to improve the
usability and aesthetics of the app, in a real-world app, there are many
other design features that are equally important which is beyond scope of
this book.
If you have successfully tested the app on the emulator, you can also try
deploying it to your mobile device to check the rendering of the app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 188 ---
CHAPTER 8
Project-3: BMI Calculator
Introduction
A Body Mass Index (BMI) calculator is a tool or app used to assess an
individual’s body weight in relation to their height. It serves as a basic
indicator of whether a person’s weight falls within a healthy range or
deviates from it. BMI is widely used in healthcare, fitness, and wellness
programs to provide a simple yet informative snapshot of one’s health. BMI
is calculated using the formula: BMI = weight / (height * height), where
weight is the person’s weight in kilograms (kg) and height is the person’s
height in meters (m). For example, if someone weights 70 kg., and is 1.70 m
tall, their BMI would be calculated as follows:
BMI = 70 / (1.7 * 1.7) = 70 / 2.89 = 24.22
The resulting value is then interpreted with the predefined BMI categories to
determine if the individual is underweight, normal weight, overweight, or
obese.
The BMI classifications are as follows:
under 18.5—This is described as underweight
between 18.5 and 24.9—This is described as the healthy range
between 25 and 29.9—This is described as overweight

--- Page 189 ---
between 30 and 39.9—This is described as obesity
40 or over—This is described as severe obesity
The app that we will build in this chapter is not an exhaustive BMI
calculator catering to all age groups but rather a simplified version aimed at
showcasing key concepts of .NET MAUI. It demonstrates the fundamental
functionalities of a BMI calculator, offering users an interactive way to
calculate their BMI and receive a basic understanding of their weight status.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Creating the layout
Creating a data entry section
Data binding between UI controls
Data binding to an object
Binding value converters
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
Create a UI layout using .NET MAUI controls such as Grid, Frame,
VerticalStackLayout, Label, and Slider controls.
You will also be able to develop the UI in XAML along with
understanding how to implement data binding between UI controls.
This chapter will also help you understand how to implement data
binding between UI control and data model.
By the end of this chapter, you will learn how to implement the
functionality to calculate the BMI value in C# and how to use a value
converter to determine the weight status.
Creating the layout

--- Page 190 ---
Follow these steps to create a layout for the app:
1. Start Visual Studio.
2. In the dialog that appears, select the option: Create a new project as
shown in Figure. 8.1:
Figure 8.1: Creating a new project in Visual Studio
3. Select the programming language as C# and MAUI project to view the
MAUI project templates as shown in Figure 8.2:

--- Page 191 ---
Figure 8.2: Selecting .NET MAUI project template
4. Select .NET MAUI App and click on Next.
5. Enter the Project name as BMICalculator. Select the preferred
destination folder or leave it with the default setting, as shown in Figure
8.3:

--- Page 192 ---
Figure 8.3: Configure your project
6. You can choose the latest Framework version which is displayed under
Additional information and click on Create:
Figure 8.4: Selecting the Framework version
7. The MAUI project is created, and within a few minutes, you should be
able to see the project in the Solution Explorer, as shown in the
following figure:

--- Page 193 ---
Figure 8.5: Default Solution in Visual Studio
8. Make the following changes to the boilerplate code in MainPage.xaml.
The ContentPage will serve as the parent for all the controls in your UI.
Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/m
aui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="BMICalculator.MainPage">
5. 
6. 
7. </ContentPage>
9. Open the code-behind file MainPage.xaml.cs and remove the default
project code, as shown in the following code:
1. namespace BMICalculator;
2. 
3. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
4. {
5.  public MainPage()
6.  {
7.   InitializeComponent();
8.  }
9. 
10. }

--- Page 194 ---
10. For this app, we will have a Grid with multiple rows, which will serve
as the container for the data entry controls that we will add next.
11. By default, a Grid will be created with one row and column. To create
multiple rows and columns, we use the Grid.RowDefinitions property
of the Grid. Each RowDefinition declared inside the
Grid.RowDefinitions creates a row. For our app, we will need three
rows.
12. The height of the rows can be defined in three ways:
a. Fixed value: To assign a fixed size of logical units.
b. Auto: To take up only as much space that is required for the
controls in that specific row.
c. Star: For proportional sizing to defining sizes relative to each other
based on proportions or percentages This allows us to allocate
available space dynamically among the rows based on their
specified proportions, which is better for creating flexible and
responsive layouts.
13. We will use the proportional sizing approach to define the heights of
the rows. As the app will have minimum number of controls that we will
place inside the respective rows, we will define equal proportions for
the row height. Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/m
aui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="BMICalculator.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid RowSpacing="10"
7.           Background="LightGray">
8.         <Grid.RowDefinitions>
9.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
10.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
11.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
12.         </Grid.RowDefinitions>
13.  

--- Page 195 ---
14.     </Grid>
15. </ContentPage>
14. Any control can be placed within a Grid by using its Grid.Row
property that represent which row the control will be placed in. The
values of rows start with 0. This means that if there are two rows in the
Grid, the first row will be represented by the value Grid.Row= 0 and
the second row by the value Grid.Row=1, and so on.
15. For our app, we will place Frame controls inside the rows. Frame
controls are generally used to create borders around related controls to
show that they have something in common. It may be worth mentioning
here that a Border can also be used in place of a Frame.
16. Let us assign gray color for the Grid using its Background property
and assign a white color background for the Frame controls by using
the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/m
aui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="BMICalculator.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid RowSpacing="10"
7.           Background="LightGray">
8.         <Grid.RowDefinitions>
9.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
10.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
11.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
12.         </Grid.RowDefinitions>
13.  
14.         <Frame Background="White">
15.         </Frame>
16. 
17.         <Frame Background="White"
18.                Grid.Row="1">
19.         </Frame>

--- Page 196 ---
20. 
21.         <Frame Background="White"
22.                Grid.Row="2">
23.         </Frame>
24.     </Grid>
25. </ContentPage>
17. At this stage, the UI should look like the illustration in Figure. 8.6:
Figure 8.6: Layout of the app
Creating a data entry section

--- Page 197 ---
Follow these steps to insert the necessary controls to develop the UI that
forms the data entry section:
1. In the previous section, we added Frames inside the Grid. As the
Frame can take only one child, we will use a layout container like
VerticalStackLayout as the child of the Frame. We will then place the
other controls of the UI inside it. Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/m
aui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="BMICalculator.MainPage">
5. 
6.     <Grid RowSpacing="10"
7.           Background="LightGray">
8.         <Grid.RowDefinitions>
9.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
10.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
11.             <RowDefinition Height="*" />
12.         </Grid.RowDefinitions>
13.  
14.         <Frame Background="White">
15.             <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
16.  
17.             </VerticalStackLayout>
18.         </Frame>
19.         <Frame Background="White"
20.                Grid.Row="1">
21.             <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
22. 
23.             </VerticalStackLayout>
24.         </Frame>
25.         <Frame Background="White"
26.                Grid.Row="2">
27.             <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
28. 

--- Page 198 ---
29.             </VerticalStackLayout>
30.         </Frame>
31.     </Grid>
32. </ContentPage>
2. To enter the height and weight, we need to provide some controls. In the
row 1 frame, let us add the following controls:
A label to provide the caption to enter Height.
Another label to display the value that will be set by a Slider control,
using data binding.
A Slider control with minimum and maximum values set to 40 and
200 respectively, which represents the height of the person in cm.
Refer to the following code:
1.  <Frame Background="White">
2.      <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
3.          <Label Text="Height (in cm.)" />
4.          <Label Text="130.0" />
5.          <Slider x:Name="slrHeight"
6.                  Minimum="40"
7.                  Maximum="200" />
8.      </VerticalStackLayout>
9.  </Frame>
3. We can add a similar set of UI controls in Row 2 for selecting the
weight in kg:
1.  <Frame Background="White"
2.         Grid.Row="1">
3.      <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
4.          <Label Text="Weight (in kg.)" />
5.          <Label Text="70.5"/>
6.          <Slider x:Name="slrWeight"
7.                  Minimum="40"

--- Page 199 ---
8.                  Maximum="200" />
9.      </VerticalStackLayout>
10.  </Frame>
4. To display the calculated BMI value and the weight status, let us insert
Label controls in Row 3 as shown in the following code:
1.  <Frame Background="White"
2.         Grid.Row="2">
3.      <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
4.          <Label />
5.          <Label />
6.          <Label />
7.      </VerticalStackLayout>
8.  </Frame>
5. At this stage, the app should resemble the screenshot as shown in the
following figure:

--- Page 200 ---
Figure 8.7: The UI without any styles applied to the labels
6. In Chapter 7, Project-2: Tip Calculator, we learned how to create
named styles and assign it to UI controls. In this simple app, we will use
the same style for all the Labels so we can create a default style for the
Label controls to display the Text using the Title font size. Refer to the
following code:
1. <Grid.Resources>
2.     <Style TargetType="Label">
3.         <Setter Property="FontSize"
4.                 Value="Title" />

--- Page 201 ---
5.     </Style>
6. </Grid.Resources>
The data entry section is now complete. At this stage, your app should
resemble the following screenshot:
Figure 8.8: The UI after applying a default style to all labels
Next, we will implement data binding in our app.
Data binding between UI controls
Data binding is a technique of linking the properties of two objects so that
changes in the property of one object are automatically reflected in the other

--- Page 202 ---
object’s property. One of the two objects involved in data binding is almost
always a UI control, and the other object could be either:
Another UI control
An object in the code file
In this app, we will implement both the above types of data binding to help
you understand them in an easy way. Let us now look at how UI controls—a
Label and a Slider—can seamlessly interact with one another through data
binding.
1. Our first requirement is to display the value of the Slider in the Label
whenever it is adjusted. If data binding is not available, we have to use
the Slider’s ValueChanged event and bind an event handler in which
you can access the Slider’s Value property to the Text property of the
Label. With data binding, this task is automated so there is no need for
you to implement the event handler and the code for the same.
2. Data binding can be done either in XAML or using C#, but the XAML
approach is easier.
3. The data binding is set on the target object, which in our example is the
Label. Two XAML markup extensions are used to define the data
binding:
The x:Reference markup extension is used to reference the source
object (e.g. slrHeight)
The Binding markup extension links the Label’s Text property to the
Slider’s Value property.
To bind the data, we use the following expression:
1. <Label BindingContext="{x:Reference slrHeight}"
2.        Text="{Binding Path=Value}" />
4. Additionally, the value can be formatted by providing a placeholder to
the StringFormat property of the Binding markup extension. Ensure to
provide single quote characters around the formatting string which will
help the XAML parser avoid conflict with the curly braces of the
Binding markup extension.
5. In order to display the value with one decimal place we use the

--- Page 203 ---
placeholder ‘{0:F1}’ to set the StringFormat:
1. <Label BindingContext="{x:Reference slrHeight}"
2.        Text="{Binding Path=Value, StringFormat='{0:F1}'}" />
6. Repeat the above steps for the section representing Weight (in kgs.):
1. <Frame Background="White"
2.                Grid.Row="1">
3.     <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
4.         <Label Text="Weight (in kg.)" />
5.         <Label BindingContext="{x:Reference slrWeight}"
6.                Text="{Binding Path=Value, StringFormat='{0:F1}'}"/>
7.         <Slider x:Name="slrWeight"
8.                 Minimum="40"
9.                 Maximum="200"
10.                 ValueChanged="slr_ValueChanged" />
11.     </VerticalStackLayout>
12.  </Frame>
7. Now, run the app and check if the value of the Slider controls are
displayed in the corresponding Label controls when adjusted.
Data binding to an object
In the previous section, we implemented data binding between the UI
controls. When the slider value is changed, we can use the Slider’s
ValueChanged event to calculate the BMI in the code-behind file. To update
the UI whenever the value in the code-behind file changes, we can
implement a class that will be known as a model (or ViewModel if MVVM
architectural pattern is used). The model uses a way to let the system know
when a property's value changes. This is done through the
INotifyPropertyChanged interface, which has an event named
PropertyChanged. When a class follows this interface and one of its
properties changes, the event is triggered. If the property does not change,
the event will not be triggered. In our solution, the BMI class has a property
called BMIValue. When this value changes, it triggers the
PropertyChanged event. Refer to the following code:
1. using System;

--- Page 204 ---
2. using System.Collections.Generic;
3. using System.ComponentModel;
4. using System.Linq;
5. using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;
6. using System.Text;
7. using System.Threading.Tasks;
8. 
9. namespace BMICalculator
10. {
11.     public class BMI : INotifyPropertyChanged
12.     {
13.    private double bmivalue;
14. 
15.    public double BMIValue
16.    {
17.     get { return bmivalue; }
18.     set 
19.     {
20.      if(bmivalue != value)
21.      {
22.                     bmivalue = value;
23.       NotifyPropertyChanged();
24.           }
25.       }
26.   }
27. 
28.         public event PropertyChangedEventHandler PropertyChanged;
29. 
30.    private void NotifyPropertyChanged([CallerMemberName] 
String propertyName = "")
31.    {
32.     PropertyChanged?.Invoke(this, new 
PropertyChangedEventArgs(propertyName));
33.    }
34.     }

--- Page 205 ---
35. }
In the code-behind file, we create an instance of the model, that is, BMI
class. Whenever the Slider value is changed, the BMI is calculated, and the
BMIValue property is updated, which causes the Label control in Grid’s
Row 3 to reflect the updated value. Refer to the following code:
1. namespace BMICalculator;
2. 
3. public partial class MainPage : ContentPage
4. {
5.     BMI MyBMI;
6. 
7.     public MainPage()
8.     {
9.         InitializeComponent();
10.         MyBMI = new BMI { BMIValue = 0 };
11.         BindingContext = MyBMI;
12.     }
13. 
14.     private void slr_ValueChanged(object sender, ValueChangedEventAr
gs e)
15.     {
16.         CalculateBMI();
17.     }
18. 
19.     private void CalculateBMI()
20.     {
21.         Double height = slrHeight.Value / 100;
22.         Double weight = slrWeight.Value;
23. 
24.         MyBMI.BMIValue = weight / (height * height);
25.     }
26. }
Binding value converters

--- Page 206 ---
Data binding transfers data from a source property to a target property in
one-way binding mode and two-way binding in the reverse direction. When
the source and target properties are of the same type, or when the source
type can be converted to the target type through an implicit conversion, the
data transfer is straightforward. When that is not the case, a ValueConverter
must be implemented to take place for explicit type conversion.
In our solution, we have calculated the BMI value in the code-behind file.
Follow these steps to display the BMI category based on the BMI value that
we have calculated:
1. We want to display the weight status also in the UI. While it is easy to
create another property of String type in the BMI class and assign the
weight status to this property to display it in the UI, we will use this
opportunity to demonstrate the concept of a ValueConverter.
2. The source in this case is the BMIValue, which is of type Double, and
the target property is a string, which displays one of the four possible
strings to indicate the weight status. To achieve this, we implement a
ValueToStringConverter class that implements a IValueConverter
interface. Refer to the following code:
1. using System;
2. using System.Collections.Generic;
3. using System.Globalization;
4. using System.Linq;
5. using System.Text;
6. using System.Threading.Tasks;
7. 
8. namespace BMICalculator
9. {
10.     public class ValueToStringConverter : IValueConverter
11.     {
12.         public object Convert(object value, Type targetType, 
object parameter, CultureInfo culture)
13.         {
14.             throw new NotImplementedException(); 
15.         }
16. 

--- Page 207 ---
17.         public object ConvertBack(object value, 
Type targetType, object parameter, CultureInfo culture)
18.         {
19.             throw new NotImplementedException();
20.         }
21.     }
22. }
3. You can then create an instance of this class using XAML markup, as
shown in the source code. Notice the use of an additional attribute
xmlns:local in XAML which is required when you are instantiating an
object in XAML. You can then set this instance to the Converter
property of the Binding markup extension. Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/m
aui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              xmlns:local="clr-namespace:BMICalculator"
5.              x:Class="BMICalculator.MainPage">
6. 
7.     <ContentPage.Resources>
8.         <local:ValueToStringConverter x:Key="valToString" />
9.     </ContentPage.Resources>
 
1. <Frame Background="White"
2.        Grid.Row="2">
3.     <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20">
4.         <Label Text="Your BMI" />
5.         <Label Text="{Binding Path=BMIValue, 
StringFormat='{0:F1}'}" />
6.         <Label Text="{Binding Path=BMIValue, 
Converter={StaticResource valToString}}" />
7.     </VerticalStackLayout>
8. </Frame>
4. The Convert method is called when data moves from the source
property to the target property in the binding. The argument named

--- Page 208 ---
value is the object or value from the data binding source. In our
example, this is the BMIValue. The method can now return a value of
the type of the data binding target. The following code will return the
weight status as a String, representing the BMI category depending on
the value of the calculated BMI. Refer to the following code:
1. using System;
2. using System.Collections.Generic;
3. using System.Globalization;
4. using System.Linq;
5. using System.Text;
6. using System.Threading.Tasks;
7. 
8. namespace BMICalculator
9. {
10.     public class ValueToStringConverter : IValueConverter
11.     {
12.         private const Double LIM_NORMALWEIGHT = 18.5F;
13.         private const Double LIM_OVERWEIGHT = 25.0F;
14.         private const Double LIM_OBESEWEIGHT = 30.0F;
15.         
16. 
17.         public object Convert(object value, Type targetType, 
object parameter, CultureInfo culture)
18.         {
19.             Double bmi = (Double)value;
20.             String result = null;
21.             /*
22.              * 
23.              Underweight: BMI is less than 18.5
24.              Normal weight: BMI is 18.5 to 24.9
25.              Overweight: BMI is 25 to 29.9
26.              Obese: BMI is 30 or more
27.              * 

--- Page 209 ---
28.              * */
29.             
30.             if(bmi < LIM_NORMALWEIGHT) { result = "Under Weigh
t"; }
31. 
32.             if (bmi >= LIM_NORMALWEIGHT && bmi < 
LIM_OVERWEIGHT) { return "Normal Weight"; }
33. 
34.             if (bmi >= LIM_OVERWEIGHT && bmi < 
LIM_OBESEWEIGHT) { return "Over Weight"; }
35. 
36.             if (bmi >= LIM_OBESEWEIGHT) 
{ return "Obese Weight"; }
37. 
38.             return result; 
39.         }
40. 
41.         public object ConvertBack(object value, 
Type targetType, object parameter, CultureInfo culture)
42.         {
43.             throw new NotImplementedException();
44.         }
45.     }
46. }
5. The ConvertBack method is called when the data moves from target to
source. This happens in TwoWay or OneWayToSource bindings for the
opposite conversion. In our case, this does not require implementation.
6. After implementing the above, you can run the app and check if the
weight status is getting reflected in the UI when the BMI value changes
while the Slider controls are manipulated.
Refer to the following figure:

--- Page 210 ---
Figure 8.9: After implementing data binding
7. Finally, ensure updating the Title in the AppShell.xaml file with the
name of the app, for example, BMI Calculator, by using the following
code:
1. <Shell
2.     x:Class="BMICalculator.AppShell"
3.     xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
4.     xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
5.     xmlns:local="clr-namespace:BMICalculator"
6.     Shell.FlyoutBehavior="Disabled">

--- Page 211 ---
7. 
8.     <ShellContent
9.         Title="BMI Calculator"
10.         ContentTemplate="{DataTemplate local:MainPage}"
11.         Route="MainPage" />
12. 
13. </Shell>
The following figure is an illustration of the final design of the BMI
calculator:

--- Page 212 ---
Figure 8.10: Final design of the BMI Calculator
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have developed your third project using .NET MAUI.
You will also be able to run it on your device. In case you face any errors,
check the source code provided for reference, compare it with your code,
and make the necessary corrections.

--- Page 213 ---
In the next chapter, we will work on improving our skills further by
developing a Unit Converter.
Points to remember
Here are some key takeaways from this chapter:
Ensure that you choose the right .NET Framework version while
creating the project.
This app demonstrated how you can implement data binding in
different scenarios.
Data binding can be implemented either using XAML or C#.
The bindingcontext property is assigned to an x:Reference markup
extension to refer to another control. The source property is specified
with the Path property. While binding to objects, Binding Context can
be set in C#.
It is important to implement INotifyPropertyChanged for the data
binding mechanism to be notified of updates when the model is
changed.
Use StringFormat and ValueConverter where necessary to change the
format or type of data displayed by the target control.
If you have successfully tested the app on the emulator, you can also
try deploying it to your mobile device to check the rendering of the
app.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 214 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 215 ---
CHAPTER 9
Project-4: Unit Converter
Introduction
A Unit Converter is an invaluable tool that simplifies the conversion of
measurements from one unit to another. Doing these conversations manually
can become complex, even using a calculator. Unit converters are especially
useful for students and a wide range of professionals in various fields who
must perform unit conversions as a part of their day-to-day work.
In this chapter, we will develop a Unit Converter app that will help users
convert values swiftly and accurately among diverse units of measurement
related to length, weight, volume, area, temperature, and time. The focus
will be on understanding how to use .NET MAUI to develop such an app
and not on applying best practices using design patterns. The application
structure is intentionally kept simple so that a beginner can also follow it
easily. Advanced readers might want to implement it using the Model-View-
ViewModel (MVVM) pattern, which provides the benefit of separating the
concerns, making the code more maintainable, and promoting testability.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Creating the main menu layout
Creating a navigational system

--- Page 216 ---
Creating the data entry section
Performing the conversions
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
Create a navigation system to allow users to navigate between the
main menu and the detail pages, both forward and backward.
You will also be able to develop the UI for the app pages in XAML
and implement the logic to convert values from one unit to another in
C#.
Creating the main menu layout
Follow these steps to create a new app for the Unit Converter:
1. Open Visual Studio.
2. In the dialog that appears, select the option: Create a new project, as
shown in Figure 9.1:
Figure 9.1: Creating a new project in Visual Studio
3. Select the programming language as C# and the Project type as MAUI

--- Page 217 ---
project to view the MAUI project templates as shown in Figure 9.2:
Figure 9.2: Selecting .NET MAUI project template
4. Select .NET MAUI App and click on Next.
5. Enter the Project name as UnitConverter. Select the preferred
destination folder or leave it with the default setting, as shown in Figure
9.3:

--- Page 218 ---
Figure 9.3: Configure your new project
6. You can choose the latest framework version which is displayed under
Additional information and click on Create, as shown in Figure 9.4:
Figure 9.4: Selecting the framework version
7. The MAUI project is created, and within a few minutes, you should be
able to see the project in the Solution Explorer, as shown in Figure 9.5:

--- Page 219 ---
Figure 9.5: Default Solution in Visual Studio
8. Modify the default markup from the MainPage.xaml file, as shown in
Figure 9.6:
Figure 9.6: MainPage.xaml after modification
9. Modify the default C# code from the code-behind file as well, as shown
in Figure 9.7:

--- Page 220 ---
Figure 9.7: MainPage.xaml.cs after modification
10. In our app, we will implement a menu in MainPage.xaml. The menu
will consist of multiple buttons that will help users navigate to different
pages for unit conversion.
11. While the main menu can be implemented in various ways—using a
Grid, a WrapPanel, etc., we will use a Grid.
12. Let us define a grid with three rows and two columns, as shown in the
below code snippet. Since we have discussed Grid in detail in Chapter
7, Project-2: Tip Calculator, we will not repeat the explanation here.
Refer to the following code:
1. <Grid ColumnSpacing="10" RowSpacing="10" Padding="10">
2.     <Grid.RowDefinitions>
3.         <RowDefinition Height="180" />
4.         <RowDefinition Height="180" />
5.         <RowDefinition Height="180" />
6.     </Grid.RowDefinitions>
7.     <Grid.ColumnDefinitions>
8.         <ColumnDefinition Width="*" />
9.         <ColumnDefinition Width="*" />
10.     </Grid.ColumnDefinitions>  
11. </Grid>

--- Page 221 ---
13. Place the Button controls in each cell using the Grid.Row and
Grid.Column properties and assign the Text property of the Button to
display the different units of measurement that we will implement in
this project. Refer to the following code:
1. <Button x:Name=”lengthButton”
2.         Text=”Length”
3.         Clicked=”lengthButton_Clicked”
4.         Grid.Row=”0”
5.         Grid.Column=”0” />
6. 
7. <Button x:Name=”weightButton”
8.         Text=”Weight”
9.         Clicked=”weightButton_Clicked”
10.         Grid.Row=”0”
11.         Grid.Column=”1” />
12. 
13. <Button x:Name=”volumeButton”
14.         Text=”Volume”
15.         Clicked=”volumeButton_Clicked”
16.         Grid.Row=”1”
17.         Grid.Column=”0” />
18. 
19. <Button x:Name=”tempButton”
20.         Text=”Temperature”
21.         Clicked=”tempButton_Clicked”
22.         Grid.Row=”1”
23.         Grid.Column=”1” />
24. 
25. <Button x:Name=”areaButton”
26.         Text=”Area”
27.         Clicked=”areaButton_Clicked”
28.         Grid.Row=”2”
29.         Grid.Column=”0” />
30. 

--- Page 222 ---
31. <Button x:Name=”timeButton”
32.         Text=”Time”
33.         Clicked=”timeButton_Clicked”
34.         Grid.Row=”2”
35.         Grid.Column=”1” />
14. Optionally you can provide different background colors for the buttons
in the menu screen using the BackgroundColor attribute. Refer to the
following code:
1. <Button x:Name="lengthButton"
2.         Text="Length"
3.         Clicked="lengthButton_Clicked"
4.         BackgroundColor="LightSeaGreen"
5.         Grid.Row="0"
6.         Grid.Column="0" />
7. 
8. <Button x:Name="weightButton"
9.         Text="Weight"
10.         Clicked="weightButton_Clicked"
11.         BackgroundColor="LightCoral"
12.         Grid.Row="0"
13.         Grid.Column="1" />
14. 
15. <Button x:Name="volumeButton"
16.         Text="Volume"
17.         Clicked="volumeButton_Clicked"
18.         BackgroundColor="MediumSlateBlue"
19.         Grid.Row="1"
20.         Grid.Column="0" />
21. 
22. <Button x:Name="tempButton"
23.         Text="Temperature"
24.         Clicked="tempButton_Clicked"
25.         BackgroundColor="LightSlateGray"
26.         Grid.Row="1"

--- Page 223 ---
27.         Grid.Column="1" />
28. 
29. <Button x:Name="areaButton"
30.         Text="Area"
31.         Clicked="areaButton_Clicked"
32.         BackgroundColor="LightSalmon"
33.         Grid.Row="2"
34.         Grid.Column="0" />
35. 
36. <Button x:Name="timeButton"
37.         Text="Time"
38.         Clicked="timeButton_Clicked"
39.         BackgroundColor="SkyBlue"
40.         Grid.Row="2"
41.         Grid.Column="1" />
15. Remember to change the Title attribute of the page as appropriate. In
our example, we have renamed it to Menu, as shown in the following
figure:

--- Page 224 ---
Figure 9.8: The completed menu
16. We will implement the Button_Clicked event handlers in a later step.
Creating the navigational system
The apps that we developed in Projects 1- 3 were single-page applications
and did not present any challenges of navigating between pages. .NET
MAUI offers multiple options for developing multi-page apps;

--- Page 225 ---
NavigationPage is one of them. The NavigationPage simplifies the creation
of a navigational system. However, we need to define a root page first.
Starting from the root page, you can navigate to any content page and then
return to the root page effortlessly.
We will set the MainPage.xaml created in the previous section, as the root
page of our app. Follow these steps to create a navigational system that lets
you navigate from the root page to a content page by clicking a button and
returning to the root page as well:
1. In the App.xaml.cs file, create an instance of the NavigationPage and
pass an instance of the MainPage as an argument to its constructor.
2. This instance of the NavigationPage is then assigned to the MainPage
property of the App class, as shown in the following snippet :
1. MainPage = new NavigationPage(new MainPage());
3. Now, let us add a content page for the Length category where we will
perform the conversion between different units of measurement related
to Length. To do this, right-click on the Project Name in the Solution
Explorer and select Add | New Item | as shown in Figure 9.9:

--- Page 226 ---
Figure 9.9: Adding a new Content Page
4. Select .NET MAUI ContentPage (XAML), as shown in Figure 9.10:

--- Page 227 ---
Figure 9.10: Select .NET MAUI ContentPage (XAML)
5. Rename the file to LengthPage.xaml and click Add. A new XAML
page LengthPage.xaml should be added to the project and be visible in
the Solution Explorer with a corresponding code-behind file named as
LengthPage.xaml.cs.
6. To navigate from the root page (MainPage.xaml) to the newly created
LengthPage, open the MainPage.xaml.cs file.
7. In the clicked event handler of the corresponding Button control, use
the Navigation.PushAsync() method and pass an instance of the
LengthPage as its argument. Since this is an asynchronous method, you
will have to use the await keyword and Visual Studio will automatically
add an async keyword to the event handler as well. Refer to the
following code:
1.
private async void lengthButton_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e
)
2. {
3.  await Navigation.PushAsync(new LengthPage());
4. }  
8. Now, run the app in your emulator or device and click on the Length
button to check if you can navigate to the content page. Observe that on
the top, you will see a navigation bar with a back button. If you click the
back button, it will return to the root page:

--- Page 228 ---
Figure 9.11: Back button to return to root page
9. Repeat steps 3-6 to add the respective content pages for all other
categories, i.e., Weight, Volume, Temperature, Area, and Time.
10. Run the app in the Emulator or device to check if the navigation
system between the menu and the respective content pages is working
properly.
Creating the data entry section
In the previous section, we added content pages for each type of conversion.
In this section, we will create the data entry sections in the content pages,
which will enable users to perform the conversion.
Let us start with the LengthPage.xaml. We need the user to be able to select
the source unit and the target unit from the available units of measurement.
For this purpose, let us add two Picker controls that can display the available
units and allow the user to select the source and target units for the
conversion.
1. Start by inserting a VerticalStackLayout in the ContentPage which
will automatically stack its children vertically.
2. Let us add Spacing and Padding to improve the arrangement of the
controls in the page. Refer to the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/m
aui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="UnitConverter.LengthPage"
5.              Title="Convert Length">
6.     <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20"
7.                          Padding="30,20">
8. 
9.     </VerticalStackLayout>

--- Page 229 ---
10. </ContentPage>
3. Add two Picker controls—one to select the source unit and the other to
select the target unit. We need to assign names to the Picker controls as
sourcePicker and targetPicker, since we need to access them from the
code-behind file to populate them.
4. Insert Label controls above each Picker control for describing its
purpose to the user:
1. <Label Text="Select Source Unit" />
2. <Picker x:Name="sourcePicker" />
3. <Label Text="Select Target Unit" />
4. <Picker x:Name="targetPicker" />
5. Next, add an Entry control for the user to enter the value to be
converted and an accompanying Label control with the instructions.
6. Since the user is expected to enter only numbers, a numeric keyboard
can be shown to the user instead of the default alpha-numeric keyboard
when they select the control to enter information. You can set the
Keyboard attribute of the Entry to Numeric to show a numeric
keyboard to the user. Refer to the following code:
1. <Label Text="Select Source Unit" />
2. <Picker x:Name="sourcePicker" />
3. <Label Text="Select Target Unit" />
4. <Picker x:Name="targetPicker" />
5. <Label Text="Enter value to convert" />
6. <Entry x:Name="sourceText"
7.        Keyboard="Numeric" />
7. Add a Button control to start the conversion. We will implement the
event handler for the clicked event shortly.
8. Finally, a label control will be added to display the result of the
conversion. The complete markup of the LengthPage is shown in the
following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/m
aui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"

--- Page 230 ---
4.              x:Class="UnitConverter.LengthPage"
5.              Title="Convert Length">
6.     <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20"
7.                          Padding="30,20">
8.         <Label Text="Select Source Unit" />
9.         <Picker x:Name="sourcePicker" />
10.         <Label Text="Select Target Unit" />
11.         <Picker x:Name="targetPicker" />
12.         <Label Text="Enter value to convert" />
13.         <Entry x:Name="sourceText"
14.                Keyboard="Numeric" />
15.         <Button Text="Convert"
16.                 Clicked="Button_Clicked" />
17.         <Label x:Name="resultText" />
18.     </VerticalStackLayout>
19. </ContentPage>
9. Remember to update the Title of the ContentPage as well. This is
illustrated in the following figure:

--- Page 231 ---
Figure 9.12: Content page for length conversion
Performing the conversions
Let us start by implementing the conversion for Length in the
LengthPage.xaml.cs file:
1. We need to display the available units for conversion in the Picker
controls for the source unit and target unit. This can be done by creating
a string array that stores the units of measurement.
1. string[] availableUnits = { "Meter", "Kilometre", 
"Centimetre", "Millimetre", "Mile", "Yard", "Foot", "Inch" };
2. Assign the array to the ItemSource property of the Picker controls.

--- Page 232 ---
3. For the initial state of the source unit, assign the SelectedIndex of the
sourcePicker to 0 to display the first element in the array.
4. For the initial state of the target unit, we need to display the second
element of the array. Use the following code to assign the
SelectedIndex of the targetPicker to 1 to display the second element
of the array:
1. namespace UnitConverter;
2. 
3. public partial class LengthPage : ContentPage
4. {
5.  string[] availableUnits = { "Meter", "Kilometre", 
"Centimetre", "Millimetre", "Mile", "Yard", "Foot", "Inch" };
6. 
7.  public LengthPage()
8.  {
9.   InitializeComponent();
10.   sourcePicker.ItemsSource = availableUnits;
11.   sourcePicker.SelectedIndex = 0;
12.   targetPicker.ItemsSource = availableUnits;
13.   targetPicker.SelectedIndex = 1;
14.  }
15. 
16.     private void Button_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
17.     {
18. 

--- Page 233 ---
19.     }
20. 
21. }
5. In the Button_Clicked event handler, we will perform the conversion
only if two conditions are satisfied:
a. There is data entered in the Entry control for the source value to be
converted.
b. The data entered is a valid numerical value.
c. The following code helps check if both these conditions are satisfied:
1. private void Button_Clicked(object sender, EventArgs e)
2. {
3.  if (!String.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(sourceText.Text) && double.Try
Parse(sourceText.Text, out double sourceValue))
4.  {
5.  }
6. }
6. For the conversion, we can implement a helper method named
ConvertValue which takes three arguments:
1. private double ConvertValue(double sourceValue, 
int sourceIndex, int targetIndex)
2. {
3. }
7. The conversion factors are mentioned in the array. Depending on the
choice of the units in the two Picker controls, the conversion
calculation is easily done using a formula. Refer to the following code:
1. private double ConvertValue(double sourceValue, int 

--- Page 234 ---
sourceIndex, int targetIndex)
2. {
3.  double[] conversionFactors = { 1, 0.001, 100, 1000, 
0.000621371, 1.09341, 3.28084, 39.3701};
4.  return sourceValue * conversionFactors[targetIndex] 
/ conversionFactors[sourceIndex];
5. }
8. Finally, the converted value can be displayed in the resultLabel using
string interpolation. Refer to the following code:
1. if (!String.IsNullOrWhiteSpace(sourceText.Text) && double.
TryParse(sourceText.Text, out double sourceValue))
2. {
3.  double resultValue = ConvertValue(sourceValue, 
sourcePicker.SelectedIndex, targetPicker.SelectedIndex);
4.  resultText.Text = $"Result:\n{resultValue}";
5. }
6. else 
7. {
8.  resultText.Text = "";
9. }
9. Run the app now and check the functionality by selecting different units
of measurement in the sourcePicker and targetPicker and check the
converted value. This is illustrated in the following figure:

--- Page 235 ---
Figure 9.13: Checking the length converter
10. Repeat the above steps for other measurement categories as well,
replacing the two arrays: availableUnits and the conversionFactors.
11. For weight conversion use the following code:
1. string[] availableUnits = { "Kilogram", "Gram", "Milligram", 
"Tonne", "Stone", "Pound", "Ounce" };
2. 
3. double[] conversionFactors = { 1, 1000, 1000000, 0.001, 
0.157473, 2.20462, 35.274 };
12. For volume conversion use the following code:
1. string[] availableUnits = { "Litre", "Millilitre", 
"Cubic foot", "Cubic inch", "Gallon (US)", "Gallon (UK)" };

--- Page 236 ---
2. 
3. double[] conversionFactors = { 1, 1000, 0.0353147, 
61.0237, 0.284, 0.219};
13. For area conversion use the following code:
1. string[] availableUnits = { "Acre", "Square Meter", 
"Square Kilometre", "Hectare", "Square Mile", "Square Yard", 
"Square Foot", "Square Inch" };
2. 
3. double[] conversionFactors = { 1, 4046.8564224, 0.0040468564, 
0.4046856422, 0.0015624989, 4840, 43560, 6272640 };
14. For time conversion use the following code:
1. string[] availableUnits = { "Hour","Second", "Millisecond", 
"Microsecond", "Minute","Day", "Week", "Month", "Year" };
2. 
3. double[] conversionFactors = { 1, 3600, 3600000, 3600000000000,
 60, 0.0416666667, 0.005952381, 0.0013689254, 0.0001140771 };
15. For temperature conversion use the following code:
1. string[] availableUnits = { "Celsius", "Fahrenheit", "Kelvin" };
16. As the conversion is non-linear, we use a formula to convert values
between different units. Refer to the following code:
1. private double ConvertValue(double sourceValue, 
int sourceIndex, int targetIndex)
2. {
3.     if (sourceIndex == targetIndex)
4.     {
5.         return sourceValue;

--- Page 237 ---
6.     }
7. 
8.     switch (sourceIndex)
9.     {
10.         case 0:
11.             return targetIndex == 1 ? (sourceValue * 
9.0 / 5.0) + 32.0 : sourceValue + 273.15;
12.         case 1:
13.             return targetIndex == 0 ? (sourceValue - 32.0) * 
5.0 / 9.0 : ((sourceValue - 32.0) * 5.0 / 9.0) + 273.15;
14.         case 2:
15.             return targetIndex == 0 ? sourceValue - 273.15 : 
((sourceValue - 273.15) * 9.0 / 5.0) + 32.0;
16.         default:
17.             return sourceValue;
18.     }
19. }
17. Run the app and check if the unit conversions between different units in
each of the categories are working. It should look like the following
screenshot:

--- Page 238 ---
Figure 9.14: Checking unit conversions in other categories
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have developed your fourth project using .NET MAUI,
and hopefully, you have been able to run it on your device as well. In case
you faced any errors, check the source code provided for reference, compare
it with your code and make the necessary corrections.
In the next chapter, we will develop another app with advanced capabilities
including accessing a REST API.
Points to remember
Here are a few key takeaways from this chapter:
Ensure that you choose the right .NET Framework version while
creating the project.
This app demonstrated how you can implement a multi-page app with
a navigation system in .NET MAUI.
The root page must be set in the App class.
To navigate from the root page to the content pages, use the
PushAsync() method in the Navigation class. Remember to use the
await keyword and mark the wrapper function as an async method as
well.

--- Page 239 ---
The focus of this chapter was on .NET MAUI features and not on
design patterns. For real-world implementation, you can explore how
to use the MVVM pattern, which provides several advantages,
including separation of concerns, testability, and easy maintainability.
It is beyond the scope of this book.
If you have successfully tested the app on the emulator, you can also
try deploying it to your mobile device to check the rendering of the
app.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 240 ---
CHAPTER 10
Project-5: Weather App
Introduction
Despite all the advancements in science and technology, there are some things in
nature that are beyond our control. Weather is one such aspect that affects our
lives in many ways. It decides what we do, wear, carry, and how we travel. A
weather app is, therefore, a trusted companion in helping us navigate different
weather conditions and ensure that our lives are not affected. Besides knowing
about the weather and the forecast, the weather app provides an excellent
learning opportunity, as it involves some of the advanced skills interfacing with
REST API, parsing data, and presenting it in a user-friendly format.
In this chapter, we will develop a simple weather app that will allow the user to
enter the name of a place and find out the weather, particularly the current
temperature and type of weather, and know the weather forecast for the next
seven days, including max and min. temperature. In the process, we will learn
how to work with REST API and parse the data. We will also learn how to use
the Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) architectural pattern in application
development.
Structure
In this chapter, we will discuss the following topics:
Introduction to MVVM architecture
Creating the project structure and the UI

--- Page 241 ---
Using the weather API
Calling the weather API from code
Creating custom type converters
Updating the UI with weather data
Displaying seven-day weather forecast
Objectives
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
Develop an application using MVVM architecture.
You will also be able to work with REST API and calling the API from
code.
Additionally, you will learn about Parsing JSON data obtained from
REST API, and advanced Data Binding skills for binding the UI to data.
By the end of this chapter, you will learn how to implement different types
of type converters and work with CollectionView and
ObservableCollection.
Introduction to MVVM architecture
In this project, we will implement what is known as the MVVM architecture. It
is a very popular architectural pattern used in .NET MAUI projects. It makes
your code more manageable and maintainable.
In the MVVM architectural pattern, the application code is divided into three
components:
Model, View and ViewModel.
Model: This is where you define the structure of the data in the form of
classes and properties.
View: This is what the user sees and interacts with. It consists of the UI
controls like the Buttons, Labels, Textboxes, Images, etc.
ViewModel: This is the bridge between the Model and the View. It takes
data based on the model and prepares it in a way that the View can

--- Page 242 ---
understand it. It also handles user interactions and sends that information
back to the Model.
The main advantages of MVVM architecture includes the following:
Separation of concerns: As the application code is separated into the
three components, i.e., model, ViewModel and view, it is easier to manage
and update.
Testability: MVVM makes it easier to test your app’s functionality
because you can test the ViewModel independently from the user
interface.
Maintainability: As your app evolves, MVVM makes it easier to add
new features or make changes without breaking the existing code.
Creating the project structure and the UI
Follow these steps to create a new app for the weather app:
1. Start Visual Studio.
2. In the dialog that appears, select the option, Create a new project, as
shown in Figure 10.1:
Figure 10.1: Creating a new project in Visual Studio

--- Page 243 ---
3. Select the programming language as C# and MAUI project to view the
MAUI project templates, as shown in Figure 10.2:
Figure 10.2: Selecting .NET MAUI project template
4. Select .NET MAUI App and click on Next.
5. Enter the project name as WeatherApp. Select the preferred destination
folder or leave it with the default setting, as shown in Figure 10.3:

--- Page 244 ---
Figure 10.3: Configure your project
6. You can choose the latest Framework version which is displayed under
Additional Information and click on Create, as shown in Figure 10.4:
Figure 10.4: Selecting the framework version
7. The MAUI project is created and within a few minutes, you should be able
to see the project in the Solution Explorer as shown, in Figure 10.5:

--- Page 245 ---
Figure 10.5: Default solution in Visual Studio
8. Once the project is created, got to Solution Explorer and right click on the
project and add a new folder named MVVM.
9. Within the MVVM folder, create sub-folders for the Models, Views and
ViewModels.
10. In the Models folder, create an empty class called WeatherData.cs. We
will edit this file later.
11. In the ViewModels folder, create a class called WeatherViewModel.cs.
12. In the Views folder, add a XAML file and name it as WeatherView.xaml.
This is illustrated in the following figure:

--- Page 246 ---
Figure 10.6: MVVM folder structure
13. Create a new instance of WeatherViewModel and assign the
BindingContext to this instance:
1. public partial class WeatherView : ContentPage
2. {
3.  public WeatherView()
4.  {
5.   InitializeComponent();
6.   BindingContext = new WeatherViewModel();
7.  }
8. }
Designing the user interface

--- Page 247 ---
To design the UI, follow these steps:
1. We need to change the startup page that will be displayed when the app is
launched. In app.xaml.cs, make the following changes. Refer to the
following code:
1. public partial class App : Application
2. {
3.  public App()
4.  {
5.   InitializeComponent();
6.   MainPage = new WeatherView();
7.  }
8. }
2. In WeatherView.xaml, add a ScrollView as a child of the ContentPage.
3. Inside the ScrollView, add a VerticalStackLayout which will help
organize the child controls in a one-dimensional vertical stack.
4. For better alignment, let us add a spacing of 20 between each child control,
and a padding of 10 on the right and left side between the contents and its
edge. Refer to the following code:
1. <VerticalStackLayout Spacing="20"
2.                      Padding="10,0"
3.                      VerticalOptions="StartAndExpand">
5. In our app, we need to provide an option to search for the weather for any
city. We can use a SearchBar for this purpose. The SearchBar also
provides a Placeholder where we can provide the help text for the user.
Refer to the following code:
1. <SearchBar x:Name="searchBar"
2.            Placeholder="Search" />

--- Page 248 ---
6. Let us add the UI controls that will be used to display the weather data. Add
Label controls to display the date, place name, weather type, and the
current temperature. Also, add an Image control to display the weather
status visually. Refer to the following code:
1. <Label Text="Oct 30, 2023"
2.        FontAttributes="Bold"
3.        FontSize="Medium"
4.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
5. <Label Text="Bangalore"
6.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
7. <Image Source="test.png"
8.        HeightRequest="200"
9.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
10. <Label Text="20 °C"
11.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
12. <Label Text="Clear Sky"
13.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
7. Save any random image file and with the file extension .png in the
Resources/Images folder and rename it to test.png. This will serve as a
placeholder for now.
8. Run the app in your emulator/device to test if the screen rendered is ok and
make any adjustments to the XAML markup, if required.
Updating the UI with date
To update the UI with date, follow these steps:
1. To display the date, we can bind the label to a DateTime property defined
in the ViewModel, which will display the current date. Refer to the
following code:

--- Page 249 ---
1. public class WeatherViewModel
2. {
3.         public DateTime Date { get; set; } = DateTime.Now;
4. }
2. Now, in the WeatherView.xaml, you can bind the label’s Text property to
this value using the databinding expression, Use the appropriate formatting
specifier to display the date in your preferred format. With the following
markup, the date will be formatted as month day, year (e.g, September 09,
2024). Refer to the following code:
1. <Label Text="
{Binding Date, StringFormat='{0:MMMM dd, yyyy}'}" />
Updating the UI with place name
To display the place name, we can use the text entered by the user in the
SearchBar. Follow these steps to do so:
1. When the user submits the place name in the search bar, we must invoke a
function in the code-behind file. To implement this, we can use the
SearchCommand property and bind it to an ICommand defined in the
ViewModel. Refer to the following code:
1. <SearchBar x:Name="searchBar"
2.             Placeholder="Search"
3.             SearchCommand="{Binding SearchCommand}"
4.             SearchCommandParameter="{Binding Source=
{x:Reference searchBar}, Path=Text}"
5.             VerticalOptions="Center" />
2. The string entered by the user can be passed to ICommand using the
SearchCommandParameter property. Refer to the following code:
1. public ICommand SearchCommand => 
new Command(async (searchText) =>

--- Page 250 ---
2. {
3.    //  TO DO
4. });
3. For displaying the name of the location, let us create a property in the
ViewModel to represent the place. Refer to the following code:
1.  public string PlaceName { get; set; }
4. The PlaceName can be populated using the value entered by the user in the
SearchBar. Refer to the following code:
1.         public ICommand SearchCommand =>
2.              new Command(async (searchText) =>
3.              {
4.                  PlaceName = searchText.ToString();
5.  
6.                  // .. TO DO
7.  
8.              });
Using the weather API
To get the weather data, we can use the free open-source weather API. Click
here to access the API docs: https://open-meteo.com/en/docs
Uncheck the hourly weather variables if they are selected. Select only the
following:
Current weather:
Temperature (2 m)
Weathercode
Daily weather variables:
Weathercode

--- Page 251 ---
Maximum temperature (2 m)
Minimum temperature (2 m)
By default, the API provides forecasts for 7 days and the temperature unit is
Celsius, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 10.7: Weather API settings
For daily variables, a time zone needs to be set as per your desired location.
Under Preview and API URL, a unique API URL is created based on your
settings, as shown in the following figure:

--- Page 252 ---
Figure 10.8: Weather API preview
Creating the model
To populate the weather data in the UI, we need to create a model class with
properties for each parameter provided by the weather API. Fortunately, Visual
Studio provides an easy way to do this.
1. Open the API URL in a new tab to see the JSON data returned by the API.
This is illustrated in the following figure:
Figure 10.9: Weather API URL
2. Copy the JSON data to your clipboard:
{"latitude":52.52,"longitude":13.419998,"generationtime_ms":0.07998
943328857422,"utc_offset_seconds":25200,"timezone":"Asia/Bangkok
","timezone_abbreviation":"+07","elevation":38.0,"current_units":
{"time":"iso8601","interval":"seconds","temperature_2m":"°C",
"weathercode":"wmo code"},"current":{"time":"2023-10-30T07:30",
"interval":900,"temperature_2m":11.8,"weathercode":3},"daily_units
":{"time":"iso8601","weathercode":"wmo
code","temperature_2m_max":"°C","temperature_2m_min":"°C"},"
daily":{"time":["2023-10-30",

--- Page 253 ---
"2023-10-31","2023-11-01","2023-11-02","2023-11-03","2023-11-04",
"2023-11-05"],"weathercode":[80,80,61,3,61,61,61],
"temperature_2m_max":[14.1,12.8,13.7,14.2,12.1,10.9,12.7],
"temperature_2m_min":[10.3,10.8,7.8,8.1,9.2,7.1,9.8]}}
3. Open the WeatherData.cs file that you created earlier in the Models folder.
4. Click on Edit | Paste Special and select Paste JSON as Classes as shown
in the following figure:
Figure 10.10: Paste as JSON Classes in Visual Studio
5. Visual Studio will automatically create classes and properties based on the
JSON data that you copied. Rename the Rootobject class to WeatherData
as shown in the following code:
1. namespace WeatherApp.MVVM.Models
2. {
3. 
4.     public class WeatherData
5.     {
6.         public float latitude { get; set; }
7.         public float longitude { get; set; }
8.         public float generationtime_ms { get; set; }
9.         public int utc_offset_seconds { get; set; }
10.         public string timezone { get; set; }

--- Page 254 ---
11.         public string timezone_abbreviation { get; set; }
12.         public float elevation { get; set; }
13.         public Current_Units current_units { get; set; }
14.         public Current current { get; set; }
15.         public Daily_Units daily_units { get; set; }
16.         public Daily daily { get; set; }
17.     }
18. 
19.     public class Current_Units
20.     {
21.         public string time { get; set; }
22.         public string interval { get; set; }
23.         public string temperature_2m { get; set; }
24.         public string weathercode { get; set; }
25.     }
26. 
27.     public class Current
28.     {
29.         public string time { get; set; }
30.         public int interval { get; set; }
31.         public float temperature_2m { get; set; }
32.         public int weathercode { get; set; }
33.     }
34. 
35.     public class Daily_Units
36.     {
37.         public string time { get; set; }
38.         public string weathercode { get; set; }
39.         public string temperature_2m_max { get; set; }
40.         public string temperature_2m_min { get; set; }
41.     }
42. 
43.     public class Daily
44.     {
45.         public string[] time { get; set; }
46.         public int[] weathercode { get; set; }

--- Page 255 ---
47.         public float[] temperature_2m_max { get; set; }
48.         public float[] temperature_2m_min { get; set; }
49.     }
50. 
51. }
Calling the weather API from code
Let us examine the weather API URL that we created in the previous step:
https://api.open-meteo.com/v1/forecast?
latitude=52.52&longitude=13.41&current=temperature_2m,weathercode&
daily=weathercode,temperature_2m_max,temperature_2m_min&timezone
=auto
Observe that some random values of latitude and longitude were selected by
default. We have to replace these with the actual latitude and longitude values of
the place that the user submits in the SearchBar.
To get the latitude and longitude values of a place, we can use the following
code:
1. private async Task<Location> GetCoordinatesAsync(string address)
2. {
3.     IEnumerable<Location> locations = await Geocoding.Default.GetLocatio
nsAsync(address);
4.     Location location = locations?.FirstOrDefault();
5.     if (location != null)
6.         Console.WriteLine($"Latitude: {location.Latitude}, Longitude: {locati
on.Longitude}, Altitude: {location.Altitude}");
7.     return location;
8. }
We can call the above function from the SearchCommand that we partially
implemented earlier. Refer to the following code:
1. public ICommand SearchCommand =>
2.      new Command(async (searchText) =>
3.      {
4.          PlaceName = searchText.ToString();
5.          var location = await GetCoordinatesAsync(searchText.ToString());

--- Page 256 ---
6.          // .. TO DO
7.      });
The Location class is defined as a part of the Microsoft.Maui.Devices.Sensors
namespace and has properties to represent the Latitude and Longitude
information. You can extract these values from the location object and provide it
in the weather API to get the weather data for that location.
https://api.open-meteo.com/v1/forecast?latitude=
{location.Latitude}&longitude=
{location.Longitude}&current=temperature_2m,weathercode&daily=weath
ercode,temperature_2m_max,temperature_2m_min&timezone=auto
To call the weather API from code, we can use the HttpClient class provided in
the .NET Framework. Refer to the following code:
1. private async Task GetWeather(Location location)
2. {
3.     var url = $"https://api.open-meteo.com/v1/forecast?latitude=
{location.Latitude}&longitude=
{location.Longitude}&current=temperature_2m,weathercode&daily=weath
ercode,
temperature_2m_max,temperature_2m_min&timezone=auto";
4. 
5.     var response = await client.GetAsync(url);
6. 
7.     if (response.IsSuccessStatusCode)
8.     {
9.         using (var responseStream = await response.Content.ReadAsStreamAs
ync())
10.         {
11.             var data = await JsonSerializer.DeserializeAsync<WeatherData>
(responseStream);
12.             Weather = data;
13.         }
14.     }
15. }
Notice that we have declared a property in the ViewModel to store the Weather
data:

--- Page 257 ---
1. public WeatherData Weather { get; set; }
We can call the above function from the SearchCommand that we partially
implemented earlier:
1. public ICommand SearchCommand =>
2.      new Command(async (searchText) =>
3.      {
4.          PlaceName = searchText.ToString();
5.          var location = await GetCoordinatesAsync(searchText.ToString());
6.          await GetWeather(location);
7.      });
Creating custom type converters
For the current weather, we get the temperature value in Celsius which can be
used directly. However, the weather description is returned as a WMO Weather
interpretation code (WW).
The following table shows various WWs:
Code Description
0 Clear sky
1, 2, 3 Mainly clear, partly cloudy, and overcast
45, 48 Fog and depositing rime fog
51, 53, 55 Drizzle: Light, moderate, and dense intensity
56, 57 Freezing drizzle: Light and dense intensity
61, 63, 65 Rain: Slight, moderate and heavy intensity
66, 67 Freezing rain: Light and heavy intensity
71, 73, 75 Snow fall: Slight, moderate, and heavy intensity
77 Snow grains
80, 81, 82 Rain showers: Slight, moderate, and violent

--- Page 258 ---
85, 86 Snow showers slight and heavy
95 * Thunderstorm: Slight or moderate
96, 99 * Thunderstorm with slight and heavy hail
Table 10.1: WMO weather interpretation codes
To make our app user-friendly, we can display the weather description in text
and represent it with an appropriate image in the UI. For this, we have to
implement two converters:
WeatherCodeToStringConverter: To convert the weather code to text
WeatherCodeToImageConverter: To convert the weather code to image
To create converters, follow these steps:
1. Create a new folder and name it as Converters.
2. Add a class named WeatherCodeToStringConverter and implement the
IValueConverter interface. The IValueConverter interface implements
two methods Convert and ConvertBack. We only need the Convert
method which can be implemented as shown in the following code, to
return the corresponding description against each Weathercode:
1. public class WeatherCodeToStringConverter : IValueConverter
2. {
3.     public object Convert(object value, Type targetType, 
object parameter, CultureInfo culture)
4.     {
5.         var code = (int)value;
6. 
7.         switch (code)
8.         {
9.             case 0: return "Clear sky";
10.             case 1: return "Mainly clear";
11.             case 2: return "Partly cloudy";
12.             case 3: return "Overcast";
13.             case 45: return "Fog";
14.             case 48: return "Depositing rime fog";
15.             case 51: return "Drizzle: Light intensity";
16.             case 53: return "Drizzle: Moderate intensity";

--- Page 259 ---
17.             case 55: return "Drizzle: Dense intensity";
18.             case 56: return "Freezing Drizzle: Light intensity";
19.             case 57: return "Freezing Drizzle: Dense intensity";
20.             case 61: return "Rain: Slight intensity";
21.             case 63: return "Rain: Moderate intensity";
22.             case 65: return "Rain: Heavy intensity";
23.             case 66: return "Freezing Rain: Light intensity";
24.             case 67: return "Freezing Rain: Heavy intensity";
25.             case 71: return "Snow fall: Slight intensity";
26.             case 73: return "Snow fall: Moderate intensity";
27.             case 75: return "Snow fall: Heavy intensity";
28.             case 77: return "Snow grains";
29.             case 80: return "Rain showers: Slight";
30.             case 81: return "Rain showers: Moderate";
31.             case 82: return "Rain showers: Violent";
32.             case 85: return "Snow showers: Slight";
33.             case 86: return "Snow showers: Heavy";
34.             case 95: return "Thunderstorm: Slight or moderate";
35.             case 96:
36.             case 99: return "Thunderstorm with slight 
and heavy hail";
37.             default: return "Not defined";
38.         }
39.     }
40. }
3. In order to represent the weather visually, we can use icons to represent the
weather status. There are several websites which provide free icons that can
be used. We will use the icons from www.iconfinder.com. Download them
and add them to the Resources/Images folder as shown in the following
figure:

--- Page 260 ---
Figure 10.11: Weather icons in the images folder
You can also download icons from other websites or create your own, provided
they are in formats compatible with XAML.
For your reference, the thumbnail images of the icons that we added are
displayed in the following figure:

--- Page 261 ---
Figure 10.12: Weather icons—Thumbnail view
4. Add another class and name it as WeatherCodeToImageConverter.
5. Implement the IValueConverter interface and the Convert method as
shown in the following code:
1. public class WeatherCodeToImageConverter : IValueConverter
2. {
3.     public object Convert(object value, Type targetType, 
object parameter, CultureInfo culture)
4.     {
5.         var code = (int)value;
6. 
7.         switch (code)
8.         {
9.             case 0:  return "clearsky.png"; 
10.             case 1:  return "cloudy.png"; 
11.             case 2:  return "cloudy.png"; 
12.             case 3:  return "cloudy.png"; 
13.             case 45: return "fog.png"; 
14.             case 48: return "fog.png"; 
15.             case 51: return "drizzle.png"; 
16.             case 53: return "drizzle.png"; 
17.             case 55: return "drizzle.png"; 
18.             case 56: return "freezingdrizzle.png"; 
19.             case 57: return "freezingdrizzle.png"; 
20.             case 61: return "rain.png"; 
21.             case 63: return "rain.png"; 
22.             case 65: return "rain.png"; 
23.             case 66: return "freezingrain.png"; 

--- Page 262 ---
24.             case 67: return "freezingrain.png"; 
25.             case 71: return "snowfall.png"; 
26.             case 73: return "snowfall.png"; 
27.             case 75: return "snowfall.png"; 
28.             case 77: return "snowgrains.png"; 
29.             case 80: return "rainshowers.png"; 
30.             case 81: return "rainshowers.png"; 
31.             case 82: return "rainshowers.png"; 
32.             case 85: return "snowshowers.png"; 
33.             case 86: return "snowshowers.png"; 
34.             case 95: return "thunderstorm.png"; 
35.             case 96: return "hail.png"; 
36.             default: return "";
37.         }
38.     }
39. }
Updating the UI with weather data
To update the weather data, follow these steps:
1. In WeatherView.xaml, instantiate the converters using the following code:
1. <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
2. <ContentPage xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/dotnet/2021/maui"
3.              xmlns:x="http://schemas.microsoft.com/winfx/2009/xaml"
4.              x:Class="WeatherApp.MVVM.Views.WeatherView"
5.              xmlns:converter="clr-namespace:WeatherApp.Converters"
6.              Title="WeatherView">
7.     <ContentPage.Resources>
8.         <converter:WeatherCodeToStringConverter x:Key=
"WeatherCodeToStringConverter" />
9.         <converter:WeatherCodeToImageConverter x:Key=
"WeatherCodeToImageConverter" />
10.     </ContentPage.Resources>
2. To display the weather code as an image, use the following markup:
1. <Image Source="{Binding Weather.current.weathercode, 
Converter={StaticResource WeatherCodeToImageConverter}}"

--- Page 263 ---
2.        HeightRequest="200"
3.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
3. To display the weather code description, use the following markup:
1. <Label Text="{Binding Weather.current.weathercode, 
Converter={StaticResource WeatherCodeToStringConverter}}"
2.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
4. Displaying the temperature is easy. You just have to bind the Label control
to the Weather.current.temperature_2m property. Refer to the following
code:
1. <Label Text="
{Binding Weather.current.temperature_2m, StringFormat='{0} °C'}"
2.        HorizontalOptions="Center" />
5. Run the application and enter a place name (e.g., Bangalore) and check if
the weather data is displayed.
6. The ViewModel class must implement INotifyPropertyChanged interface
to ensure that the UI updates and reflects the weather data if the user
submits successive changes to the place name. Instead of implementing the
INotifyPropertyChanged interface in the traditional way, we can make use
of the PropertyChanged.Fody package which helps generate the
boilerplate code and inject the necessary event and event-invokers into the
class at run time.
7. Further, click on Tools | NuGet package manager | Manage NuGet
Packages for Solution | Select Browse and search for Fody as shown in the
following figure:

--- Page 264 ---
Figure 10.13: Installing PropertyChanged.Fody Package
8. Select PropertyChanged.Fody and install it.
9. Add an attribute [AddINotifyPropertyChangedInterface] to the
ViewModel class:
1. [AddINotifyPropertyChangedInterface]
2. public class WeatherViewModel
10. Run the app now and check if successive searches with different place
names are reflecting changes in the UI.
Displaying seven-day weather forecast
The weather API also provides the weather forecast for seven days, by default.
To retrieve and store this data, we can create a new class in our model that stores
the weather data for each day. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Add the following class to the WeatherData.cs file:
1. public class DailyForecast 
2. {
3.     public string time { get; set; }
4.     public int weathercode { get; set; }

--- Page 265 ---
5.     public float temperature_2m_max { get; set; }
6.     public float temperature_2m_min { get; set; }
7. }
2. Add a property of type ObservableCollection<DailyForecast> in the
WeatherData class which will be used to store the weather forecast data
retrieved from the weather API. Refer to the following code:
1. public ObservableCollection<DailyForecast> dailyForecasts { get; set; 
} = new ObservableCollection<DailyForecast>();
3. In the VIewModel, modify the GetWeather() method that we
implemented earlier to retrieve the weather forecast data and store it in the
ObservableCollection that we created. Refer to the following code:
1. private async Task GetWeather(Location location)
2. {
3.    var url = $"https://api.open-meteo.com/v1/forecast?latitude=
{location.Latitude}&longitude={location.Longitude}&current=
temperature_2m,weathercode&daily=weathercode,
temperature_2m_max,temperature_2m_min&timezone=auto";
4. 
5.     var response = await client.GetAsync(url);
6. 
7.     if (response.IsSuccessStatusCode)
8.     {
9.         using (var responseStream = 
await response.Content.ReadAsStreamAsync())
10.         {
11.             var data = await JsonSerializer.DeserializeAsync
<WeatherData>(responseStream);
12.             Weather = data;

--- Page 266 ---
13. 
14.             Debug.WriteLine($"*****{Weather.
current.temperature_2m} | {Weather.current.weathercode}");
15. 
16.             for (int i = 0; i < Weather.daily.time.Length; i++)
17.             {
18.                 var dailyForecast = new DailyForecast {
19.                     time = Weather.daily.time[i],
20.                     temperature_2m_max = Weather.daily.
temperature_2m_max[i],
21.                     temperature_2m_min = Weather.daily.
temperature_2m_min[i],
22.                     weathercode = Weather.daily.weathercode[i]
23.                 };
24. 
25.                 Weather.dailyForecasts.Add(dailyForecast);
26.             }
27. 
28.         }
29.     }
30. }
Updating the weather forecast
To display the Weather forecast in the UI, we can use a CollectionView and
bind its ItemsSource property to the ObservableCollection that stores the
weather forecast data.

--- Page 267 ---
The CollectionView needs to be told how to display the data it has, using its
ItemTemplate property. The DataTemplate is used to define how each item
will be represented. We will define a Grid with three rows and two columns to
display the data for each day. The first column will be used to display the icon
corresponding to the Weathercode spanning all the three rows. In the second
column, the weather data will be displayed in three rows. Refer to the following
code:
1. <CollectionView x:Name="weatherforecast"
2.                 ItemsSource="{Binding Weather.dailyForecasts}">
3.     <CollectionView.ItemTemplate>
4.         <DataTemplate>
5.             <Grid BackgroundColor="Beige"
6.                   Margin="10"
7.                   HeightRequest="100">
8.                 <Grid.RowDefinitions>
9.                     <RowDefinition Height="*" />
10.                     <RowDefinition Height="*" />
11.                     <RowDefinition Height="*" />
12.                 </Grid.RowDefinitions>
13.                 <Grid.ColumnDefinitions>
14.                     <ColumnDefinition Width="100" />
15.                     <ColumnDefinition Width="*" />
16.                 </Grid.ColumnDefinitions>
17.                 <Image Source="{Binding weathercode, Converter=
{StaticResource WeatherCodeToImageConverter}}"
18.                        Grid.RowSpan="3"
19.                        Margin="10" />
20.                 <Label Grid.Column="1"
21.                        Padding="5,0"
22.                        Text="{Binding time}"
23.                        FontAttributes="Bold"
24.                        VerticalOptions="Center" />
25.                 <Label Grid.Column="1"
26.                        Grid.Row="1"
27.                        Padding="5,0"
28.                        Text="{Binding weathercode, Converter=
{StaticResource WeatherCodeToStringConverter}}"

--- Page 268 ---
29.                        VerticalOptions="Center" />
30.                 <HorizontalStackLayout Grid.Column="1"
31.                                        Padding="5,0"
32.                                        HorizontalOptions=
"StartAndExpand"
33.                                        Grid.Row="2"
34.                                        Spacing="20">
35.                     <Label Text="{Binding temperature_2m_max, 
StringFormat='Max: {0:F1} °C'}"
36.                            VerticalOptions="Center" />
37.                     <Label Text="|" VerticalOptions="Center" />
38.                     <Label Text="{Binding temperature_2m_min, 
StringFormat='Min: {0:F1} °C'}"
39.                            VerticalOptions="Center" />
40.                 </HorizontalStackLayout>
41.             </Grid>
42.         </DataTemplate>
43.     </CollectionView.ItemTemplate>
44. </CollectionView>
Run the app now and check if the weather forecast for all seven days is shown in
the scrollable list:

--- Page 269 ---
Figure 10.14: Screenshot of the app
Conclusion
In this chapter, you have developed your fifth and final project using .NET
MAUI. You will now be able to run it on your device as well. If you face any
errors, check the source code provided for reference, compare it with your code,
and make the necessary corrections.
Points to remember
Here are some key takeaways from this chapter:
Ensure that you choose the right .NET Framework version while creating
the project.
This app demonstrated how you can implement a multi-page app with a
navigation system in .NET MAUI.

--- Page 270 ---
The root page must be set in the App class.
To navigate from the root page to the content pages, use the PushAsync()
method in the Navigation class. Remember to use the await keyword and
mark the wrapper function as an async method as well.
The focus of this chapter was on .NET MAUI features and not on design
patterns. For real-world implementation, you can explore how to use the
MVVM pattern, which provides several advantages, including separation
of concerns, testability, and easy maintainability.
If you have successfully tested the app on the emulator, you can also try
deploying it to your mobile device to check the rendering of the app.
Join our book’s Discord space
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech happenings
around the world, New Release and Sessions with the Authors:
https://discord.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 271 ---
Index
A
ahead-of-time (AOT) 17
Android Studio IDE 3
app development frameworks
cross-platform applications 4
hybrid applications 3, 4
low code/no code (LCNC) approach 4
native apps 3
web apps 3
application programming interface (API) 3, 15
Avalonia 10
advantages 10, 11
limitations 11
B
Body Mass Index (BMI) calculator app 131
data binding , implementing 141, 142
data binding to object 142-144
data entry layout, creating 138-140
layout, creating 132-137
value converters, binding 144-148
C
C# 54
arrays 74, 75
class 67
conditional statements 60
constants 54-56
delegates 72, 73
events 73, 74
expressions 59
inheritance 69, 70
interfaces 70, 71
lists 75
loops 62
methods 68
operators 59
properties 68
string 56-58

--- Page 272 ---
types 54-56
variables 54-56
Color Picker app 93
background color, changing 104
color, copying to clipboard 108-113
colors, specifying in XAML 101-104
data entry section, creating 98-101
layout, creating 94-97
random colors, generating 105-107
common language runtime (CLR) 23, 84
conditional statements, C#
if-else statement 60
switch-case statement 61
Contrast, Repetition, Alignment, and Proximity (C.R.A.P.) 124
cross-platform application development 1, 2
advantages 4, 5
app development approaches 3
apps, versus websites 2, 3
emerging technologies 12
limitations 5
E
eXtensible Application Markup Language (XAML) 10, 77
data binding 87-91
markup extensions 84, 85
namespaces 83, 84
object names 84
overview 78
passing arguments 86
syntax 78, 79
F
Flutter 7
advantages 7
limitations 7, 8
I
intermediate language (IL) 17
J
just-in-time (JIT) 17
L
loops, C#
break statement 65, 66

--- Page 273 ---
continue statement 66
do-while loop 64, 65
for each 63
for loop 62, 63
while loop 64
M
migration from Xamarin.Forms 24
assisted migration, using .NET upgrade assistant 25, 26
manual migration 25
Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) 10
MVVM architectural pattern 170
advantages 170, 171
N
NativeScript 8
advantages 8
limitations 8, 9
.NET Base Class Library (BCL) 16
.NET MAUI app structure 20
layouts 21
pages 20, 21
views 21, 22
.NET Multi-platform App UI (.NET MAUI) 11, 12, 15-17
evolution, from Xamarin.Forms 23, 24
migration, from Xamarin.Forms 24
platform integration 26
working 18, 19
O
object-oriented programming (OOP) 67
operators, C#
assignment operators 59
logical operators 59
mathematical operators 59, 60
relational operators 59
P
progressive web applications (PWAs) 3
R
React Native 6
advantages 6
limitations 6
responsive web design (RWD) principles 3

--- Page 274 ---
RGB Color Mixer 93
S
Sky 7
T
Tip Calculator app 115
calculation, performing 127-129
data entry section, creating 121-124
graphical design principles, applying in UI design 124-126
layout, creating 116-121
U
unique device ID (UDID) 50
Unit Converter app 151
conversions, performing 163-167
data entry section, creating 161, 162
main menu layout, creating 152-158
navigational system, creating 158-161
Universal Windows Platform (UWP) 9, 24
Uno Platform 9
advantages 9
limitations 10
V
Visual Studio IDE 30
debugging, on Android devices 47-49
debugging, on Android Emulator 45-47
debugging, on Windows 40-44
environment setup, testing 33-40
installation 30-32
iOS device provisioning 50
Pair to Mac for iOS development 50-52
W
weather app 169
custom type converters, creating 183-186
model, creating 179, 180
MVVM architecture 170
project structure, creating 171-174
seven-day weather forecast, displaying 188, 189
UI, creating 171-174
UI, designing 174-176
UI, updating place name 176, 177
UI, updating with date 176

--- Page 275 ---
UI, updating with weather data 187, 188
weather API, calling from code 181, 182
weather API, using 177, 178
weather forecast, updating 190, 191
Windows UI 3 (WinUI 3) library 16
WMO Weather interpretation code (WW) 183
X
XAML syntax 78, 79
attached property syntax 82, 83
attribute syntax 80
comments 80
empty element syntax 81
object element syntax 80
property value syntax 81, 82
OceanofPDF.com